Chapter 1
How Candide was brought up in a beautiful castle, and how he was driven from it.
There was in Vestphalia, in the castle of M. le baron de Thunder-ten-tronckh, a young boy to whom nature had given the sweetest morals. His physiology betrayed his spirit. He had fairly straight judgment, with the simplest mind; it is, I believe, for this reason that he was called Candide. The former servants of the house suspected that he was the son of Monsieur le Baron's sister and of a good and honest neighborhood gentleman, whom this young lady never wanted to marry because he had only been able to prove that he was seventy-one quarters, and that the rest of his family tree had been lost to the ravages of time.
Monsieur le baron was one of the most powerful lords in Vestphalia, for his castle had a door and windows. Its very great hall was adorned with a tapestry. All the dogs in his backyards made up a pack in need; his grooms were his piqueurs; the vicar of the village was his grand chaplain. They all called him monseigneur, and they laughed when he told stories.
Madame la Baroness, who weighed about three hundred and fifty pounds, thereby won for herself very great consideration, and did the honors of the house with a dignity which made her even more respectable. Her seventeen-year-old daughter Cunégonde was colorful, fresh, plump, appetizing. The Baron's son appeared worthy of his father in every way. The tutor Pangloss was the oracle of the house, and little Candide listened to his lessons with all the good faith of his age and character.
Pangloss taught metaphysico-theologo-cosmolo-nigology. It proved admirably that there is no effect without a cause, and that, in this best of possible worlds, the chateau of Monseigneur le Baron was the most beautiful of chateaux and Madame the best of possible baronesses.
“It has been demonstrated,” he said, “that things cannot be otherwise: for, everything being done for an end, everything is necessarily for the best end. Notice that noses were made for glasses, so we have glasses. The legs are obviously instituted to be shod, and we have hose. The stones were shaped to be cut, and to make castles out of them, so Monseigneur has a very beautiful castle; the greatest baron in the province should be the best lodged; and, pigs being made to be eaten, we eat pork all year round: therefore those who have asserted that all is well have said a foolish thing; I had to say that everything is for the best. »
Candide listened attentively and believed innocently; for he found Mademoiselle Cunégonde extremely beautiful, although he never took the boldness to tell her so. He concluded that after the happiness of being born Baron of Thunder-ten-tronckh, the second degree of happiness was to be Miss Cunégonde; the third, to see her every day; and the fourth, to hear Master Pangloss, the greatest philosopher of the province, and consequently of all the earth.
One day, Cunégonde, while walking near the chateau, in the little wood they called a park, saw Doctor Pangloss among the brushwood, who was giving a lesson in experimental physics to her mother's maid, a very pretty, dark-haired little girl. very docile. As Mademoiselle Cunégonde had a great inclination for the sciences, she observed, without breathing, the repeated experiments which she witnessed; she saw clearly the sufficient reason of the doctor, the effects and the causes, and went back all agitated, all pensive, all filled with the desire to be learned, thinking that she might well be the sufficient reason of the young Candide, who could also be his.
She met Candide on her way back to the chateau, and blushed; Candide blushes too; she said good morning to him in a broken voice, and Candide spoke to him without knowing what he was saying. The next day after dinner, as they were leaving the table, Cunegonde and Candide found themselves behind a screen; Cunégonde dropped her handkerchief, Candide picked it up, she innocently took his hand, the young man innocently kissed the young lady's hand with a vivacity, a sensitivity, a very particular grace; their mouths met, their eyes blazed, their knees trembled, their hands wandered. M. le baron de Thunder-ten-tronckh passed near the screen, and seeing this cause and this effect, chased Candide from the chateau with great kicks in the rear; Cunégonde faints; she was slapped by Madame la Baronne as soon as she came to herself; and all was appalled in the finest and most agreeable of castles possible.
Chapter 2
What became of Candide among the Bulgarians.
Candide, driven from the earthly paradise, walked for a long time without knowing where, weeping, raising his eyes to heaven, often turning them towards the most beautiful of castles which contained the most beautiful of baronettes; he went to bed without supper in the middle of the fields between two furrows; the snow was falling in large flakes. Candide, quite chilled, dragged himself the next day to the neighboring town, which is called Valdberghoff-trarbk-dikdorff, having no money, dying of hunger and weariness. He stopped sadly at the door of a cabaret. Two men dressed in blue noticed him: "Comrade," said one, "here is a very well made young man, and who has the required size. They approached Candide and invited him to dinner very civilly. “Gentlemen,” said Candide to them with charming modesty, “you do me a lot of honor, but I have not enough to pay my bill. - Ah! sir, said one of the rookies to him, people of your figure and merit never pay anything: aren't you five feet five inches tall? "Yes, gentlemen, that's my size," he said, curtsying. - Ah! sir, sit down to table; not only will we pay for you, but we will never allow a man like you to lack money; men are only made to help one another. "You're right," said Candide; "that's what M. Pangloss has always told me, and I see that everything is for the best." We ask him to accept a few crowns, he takes them and wants to make his ticket; we don't want it, we sit down to table: "Don't you love tenderly?... - Oh! yes, he answered, I love Mademoiselle Cunégonde dearly. “No,” said one of these gentlemen, “we ask you if you are not tenderly in love with the King of the Bulgarians. "Not at all," he said, "because I've never seen him. - How? 'Or' What! he is the most charming of kings, and we must drink to his health. - Oh! very gladly, gentlemen”; and he drinks. “That is enough,” they say to him, “here you are the support, the support, the defender, the hero of the Bulgarians; your fortune is made, and your glory is assured. They immediately put irons on his feet, and lead him to the regiment. He is made to turn to the right, to the left, to raise the rod, to put back the rod, to take aim, to fire, to double the pace, and he is given thirty strokes of the stick; the next day he does the exercise a little less badly, and he receives only twenty blows; two days later he was only given ten, and he was considered a prodigy by his comrades.
Candide, completely stupefied, still did not quite understand how he was a hero. He took it into his head one fine spring day to go for a walk, walking straight ahead, believing that it was a privilege of the human species, as of the animal species, to use his legs for his pleasure. . He had not gone two leagues when four other six-foot heroes overtook him, bound him, led him into a dungeon. They asked him juridically which he liked best, to be castigated thirty-six times by the whole regiment, or to receive twelve lead bullets in the brain at the same time. In vain did he say that wills are free; and that he wanted neither, a choice had to be made; he determined, by virtue of the gift of God which is called freedom, to go through the rods thirty-six times; he had two walks. The regiment was composed of two thousand men; that made up for him four thousand strokes of the stick, which, from the nape of his neck to his ass, exposed his muscles and nerves. As they were about to proceed with the third race, Candide, unable to bear it any longer, begged for mercy that they would be good enough to beat his head off; he obtained this favour; they blindfold him, make him kneel. The King of the Bulgarians passes at this moment, inquires about the patient's crime; and as this king had a great genius, he understood, by all he learned from Candide, that he was a young metaphysician, very ignorant of the things of this world, and he granted him his pardon with a clemency which will be praised. in all newspapers and in all centuries. A brave surgeon cured Candide in three weeks with the emollients taught by Dioscorides. He already had a little skin and could walk, when the king of the Bulgarians gave battle to the king of the Abares.
Chapter 3
How Candide escaped from the Bulgarians, and what became of him.
Nothing was so beautiful, so nimble, so brilliant, so well ordered as the two armies. The trumpets, the fifes, the oboes, the drums, the cannons, formed a harmony such as never was in hell. The cannons first overthrew about six thousand men on each side; then the musketry removed from the best of all worlds about nine to ten thousand rogues who infected the surface. The bayonet was also the sufficient reason for the death of several thousand men. The whole could well amount to thirty thousand souls. Candide, who was trembling like a philosopher, hid himself as best he could during this heroic butchery. Finally, while the two kings had Te Deums sung each in his camp, he decided to go elsewhere to reason about effects and causes. He passed over heaps of the dead and dying, and reached first a neighboring village; it was in ashes: it was an abaric village that the Bulgarians had burned, according to the laws of public law. Here old men riddled with blows watched their wives die, who held their children to their bleeding breasts; there girls disembowelled after having assuaged the natural needs of a few heroes breathed their last; others, half burnt, cried out that they were being put to death. Brains were strewn on the ground next to severed arms and legs.
Candide fled as quickly as possible to another village: it belonged to Bulgarians, and Abarian heroes had treated him in the same way. Candide, still marching on throbbing limbs or through ruins, arrived at last out of the theater of war, carrying a few small provisions in his wallet, and never forgetting Miss Cunégonde. His provisions failed him when he was in Holland; but having heard that everyone was rich in that country, and that they were Christians there, he had no doubt that they treated him as well as he had been in the castle of Monsieur le Baron. before he had been driven out for Miss Cunégonde's beautiful eyes.
He begged for alms from several serious personages, who all replied that if he continued to do this job, they would lock him up in a house of correction to teach him how to live.
He then addressed himself to a man who had just spoken alone for an hour straight on charity in a large assembly. This orator, looking at him askance, said to him: “What are you doing here? are you there for a good cause? “There is no effect without a cause,” replied Candide modestly, “everything is necessarily linked and arranged for the best. I had to be kicked out of Miss Cunégonde, I had to be beaten, and I have to ask for my bread until I can earn some; it couldn't be otherwise. "My friend," said the speaker to him, "do you believe that the Pope is the Antichrist?" "I hadn't heard of it yet," answered Candide; but whether it be or not, I want bread. "You don't deserve to eat it," said the other; go, rascal, go, wretch, don't come near me with your life. The speaker's wife, having put her head out of the window and seeing a man who doubted that the pope was an antichrist, poured on his head a full... O heavens! how excessive is the zeal of religion in the ladies!
A man who had not been baptized, a good Anabaptist, named Jacques, saw the cruel and ignominious way in which one of his brothers was thus treated, a being with two feet without feathers, who had a soul; he took him to his house, cleaned him, gave him bread and beer, made him a present of two florins, and even wanted to teach him to work in his factories on Persian fabrics which are made in Holland. Candide, almost prostrating himself before him, exclaimed: "Master Pangloss had told me that everything is for the best in this world, for I am infinitely more touched by your extreme generosity than by the harshness of this gentleman in a black coat. and his wife. »
The next day, while walking, he met a beggar all covered with pustules, his eyes dead, the tip of his nose gnawed, his mouth crooked, his teeth black, and talking about his throat, tormented by a violent cough and spitting a tooth with each effort.
Chapter 4
How Candide met his former philosophy teacher, Doctor Pangloss, and what happened to him.
Candide, moved even more by compassion than by horror, gave this dreadful beggar the two florins he had received from his honest Anabaptist Jacques. The ghost stared at him, shed tears, and jumped to his neck. Candid, scared, step back. “Alas! said the wretch to the other wretch, do you no longer recognize your dear Pangloss? "What do I hear?" You, my dear master! you, in this horrible state! What misfortune has happened to you? Why are you no longer in the most beautiful of castles? What has become of Miss Cunégonde, the pearl of girls, the masterpiece of nature? "I can't take it anymore," said Pangloss. Candide immediately led him into the Anabaptist's stable, where he made him eat a little bread; and when Pangloss was remade: “Well! he said to her, Cunégonde? “She is dead,” resumed the other. Candide fainted at this word; his friend recalled his senses with a little bad vinegar which happened to be in the stable. Candide opens his eyes. “Cunegonde is dead! Ah! brave new world, where are you? But what disease did she die of? wouldn't it be to have seen me chased away from the beautiful castle of his father with great kicks? "No," said Pangloss; she was disembowelled by Bulgarian soldiers, after having been raped as much as one can be; they broke the head of Monsieur le Baron who wanted to defend her; Madame la Baronne was cut into pieces; my poor ward, treated exactly like her sister; and as for the castle, it did not remain stone on stone, not a barn, not a sheep, not a duck, not a tree; but we were well avenged, for the Abares did the same in a neighboring barony which belonged to a Bulgarian lord. »
At this speech Candide fainted again; but coming to his senses, and having said all he ought to say, he inquired into cause and effect, and sufficient reason which had put Pangloss in such a sorry state. “Alas! said the other, it is love; love, the comforter of the human race, the preserver of the universe, the soul of all sentient beings, tender love. — Alas! said Candide, I have known this love, this sovereign of hearts, this soul of our souls; he never got me more than a kiss and twenty kicks in the ass. "How could this fine cause have produced such an abominable effect on you?" »
Pangloss replied in these terms: “O my dear Candide! you knew Paquette, that pretty servant of our august baroness; I tasted in his arms the delights of paradise, which produced those torments of hell with which you see me devoured; she was infected with it, she may have died of it. Paquette got this present from a very learned Cordelier, who had gone back to the source; for he had had it from an old countess, who had received it from a cavalry captain, who owed it to a marquise, who had received it from a page, who had received it from a Jesuit, who , being a novice, had had her in direct line with one of the companions of Christopher Columbus. As for me, I won't give it to anyone, because I'm dying.
“O Pangloss! exclaimed Candide, what a strange genealogy! was it not the devil who was the root of it? "Not at all," replied this great man; it was an indispensable thing in the best of worlds, a necessary ingredient; for if Columbus had not caught, in an island of America, that disease which poisons the source of generation, which often even prevents generation, and which is evidently the opposite of the great aim of nature, we would not would have neither chocolate nor cochineal; it must also be observed that until today, in our continent, this disease is particular to us, like the controversy. The Turks, the Indians, the Persians, the Chinese, the Siamese, the Japanese, do not yet know it; but there is sufficient reason for them to know it in turn in a few centuries. In the meantime, she has made marvelous progress among us, and especially in those great armies composed of honest, well-educated stipendiaries, who decide the destiny of States; we can be sure that, when thirty thousand men fight in pitched battle against troops equal in number, there are about twenty thousand poxes on each side.
"That's admirable," said Candide, "but you have to get cured." "And how can I?" said Pangloss; I have no money, my friend; and in all the extent of this globe, we cannot be bled or taken an enema without paying, or without there being someone who pays for us. »
This last speech determined Candide; he went and threw himself at the feet of his charitable Anabaptist Jacques, and painted for him such a touching picture of the state in which his friend was reduced that the worthy man did not hesitate to take in Doctor Pangloss; he healed him at his expense. Pangloss, in the cure, lost only one eye and one ear. He wrote well and knew arithmetic perfectly. The Anabaptist Jacques made him his bookkeeper. At the end of two months, being obliged to go to Lisbon on business, he took his two philosophers in his ship. Pangloss explained to him how everything could not have been better. Jacques disagreed. “Men must have corrupted nature a little, he said, for they were not born wolves, and they became wolves. God gave them neither twenty-four cannons nor bayonets, and they made themselves bayonets and cannons to destroy themselves. I could put bankruptcies into account, and the justice that seizes the property of bankrupts to frustrate their creditors. "All that was indispensable," replied the one-eyed doctor, "and particular misfortunes do the general good, so that the more particular misfortunes there are, the better everything is." As he reasoned, the air darkened, the winds blew from the four corners of the world, and the ship was beset by the most horrible storm in sight of the port of Lisbon.
Chapter 5
Storm, shipwreck, earthquake, and what happened to Doctor Pangloss, Candide and the Anabaptist Jacques.
Half of the passengers, weakened, expiring from those inconceivable anguish which the roll of a ship carries to the nerves and to all the humors of the body agitated in opposite directions, had not even the strength to worry about the danger. The other half cried out and prayed; the sails were torn, the masts broken, the ship ajar. Worked who could, no one got along, no one ordered. The Anabaptist helped a little with the maneuver; he was on the deck; a furious sailor strikes him roughly and stretches him on the planks; but from the blow he gave her he himself had such a violent shock that he fell headlong out of the vessel. It remained suspended and attached to a broken part of the mast. The good Jacques runs to his aid, helps him up, and from the effort he makes he is thrown into the sea at the sight of the sailor, who lets him perish, without even deigning to look at him. Candide approaches, sees his benefactor who reappears for a moment and who is swallowed up forever. He wants to throw himself into the sea after him; the philosopher Pangloss prevents him, by proving to him that the harbor of Lisbon had been formed expressly so that this Anabaptist should drown there. While he was proving it a priori, the vessel half-opened, everything perished except for Pangloss, Candide, and that brutal sailor who had drowned the virtuous Anabaptist; the rascal luckily swam to shore where Pangloss and Candide were carried on a plank.
When they had come to themselves a little, they marched towards Lisbon; they had some money left, with which they hoped to save themselves from starvation after having escaped the storm.
No sooner have they set foot in the city mourning the death of their benefactor than they feel the earth tremble under their feet; the sea rises and boils in the port, and breaks the ships that are at anchor. Whirlwinds of flames and ashes cover the streets and public squares; the houses crumble, the roofs are knocked down on the foundations, and the foundations scatter; thirty thousand inhabitants of all ages and all sexes are crushed under ruins, The sailor said, whistling and swearing: "There will be something to be gained here." — What can be the sufficient reason for this phenomenon? said Pangloss. — This is the last day of the world! exclaimed Candide. The sailor runs immediately amidst the debris, faces death to find money, finds it, seizes it, gets drunk, and, having slept off his wine, buys the favors of the first willing girl whom he finds destroyed houses on the ruins and in the midst of the dying and the dead. Pangloss, however, pulled him by the sleeve. "My friend," he said to him, "that is not good, you fail universal reason, you are taking your time badly. "Head and blood!" answered the other, I am a sailor and born in Batavia; I walked on the crucifix four times in four trips to Japan; you have found your man with your universal reason! »
A few stone chips had wounded Candide; he was lying in the street and covered in debris. He said to Pangloss: “Alas! get me a little wine and oil; I'm dying. "This earthquake is not a new thing," replied Pangloss; the city of Lima experienced the same shocks in America last year; same causes, same effects: there is certainly a trail of sulfur underground from Lima to Lisbon. "Nothing is more probable," said Candide; but, for God, a little oil and wine. "How likely?" replied the philosopher; I maintain that the thing is demonstrated. Candide fainted, and Pangloss brought him some water from a nearby fountain.
The next day, having found some food as they slipped through the rubble, they repaired their strength a little. Then, they worked like the others to relieve the inhabitants who had escaped death. A few citizens rescued by them gave them as good a dinner as could be in such a disaster. It is true that the meal was sad; the guests sprinkled their bread with their tears; but Pangloss consoled them by assuring them that things could not be otherwise: "For," said he, "all this is the best." Because, if there is a volcano in Lisbon, it could not be elsewhere. Because it is impossible for things not to be where they are. Because all is well. »
A small black man, familiar with the Inquisition, who was next to him, politely spoke up and said: “Apparently sir does not believe in original sin; for, if all is well, then there has been neither fall nor punishment.
“I very humbly beg your Excellency’s pardon,” Pangloss replied even more politely, for the fall of man and the curse necessarily entered into the best of all possible worlds. "Monsieur doesn't believe in freedom, then?" said the familiar. "Your Excellency will excuse me," said Pangloss; freedom can subsist with absolute necessity; for it was necessary that we should be free; for finally the determined will…” Pangloss was in the middle of his sentence, when the familiar nodded to his steward who was serving him a drink of Port wine, or Oporto.
Chapter 6
How a beautiful auto-da-fé was made to prevent earthquakes, and how Candide was spanked.
After the earthquake which had destroyed three-quarters of Lisbon, the wise men of the country had not found a more effective means of preventing total ruin than to give the people a fine auto-da-fé; it was decided by the University of Coimbra that the spectacle of a few people being burned slowly, in great ceremony, is an infallible secret to prevent the earth from shaking.
They had consequently seized a Biscayan convinced of having married his gossip, and two Portuguese who, while eating a chicken, had torn the bacon out of it: they came after dinner to bind Doctor Pangloss and his disciple Candide, one for having spoken, and the other for having listened with an air of approval: both were led separately into extremely cool apartments, in which one was never inconvenienced by the sun; eight days later they were both clothed with a san-benito, and their heads were adorned with paper miters: Candide's miter and san-benito were painted with reversed flames and devils who had neither tails nor claws. ; but the devils of Pangloss had claws and tails, and the flames were straight. They walked in procession thus dressed, and heard a very pathetic sermon, followed by beautiful music in a drone. Candide was spanked rhythmically while they were singing; the Biscayan and the two men who had refused to eat bacon were burned, and Pangloss was hanged, although it was not the custom. The same day the earth shook again with a terrible crash.
Candid, terrified, bewildered, bewildered, all bloody, all thrilling, said to himself: “If this is the best of all possible worlds, what are the others? Pass even if I was only spanked, I was it at the Bulgarians. But, oh my dear Pangloss! the greatest of philosophers, must I have seen you hanged without my knowing why! O my dear Anabaptist, the best of men, must you have been drowned in the port! O Miss Cunégonde! the pearl of the girls, do you have to have your belly split! »
He was returning, barely supporting himself, preached, spanked, absolved and blessed, when an old woman approached him and said to him: “My son, take courage, follow me. »
Chapter 7
How an old woman took care of Candide, and how he found the one he loved.
Candide took no courage, but followed the old woman into a hovel; she gave him a jar of ointment to rub himself in, left him to eat and drink; she showed him a fairly clean little bed; near the bed was a complete coat. “Eat, drink, sleep, she told him, and may Our Lady of Atocha, Mgr Saint Antoine de Padoue and Mgr Saint Jacques de Compostelle take care of you: I will come back tomorrow. Candide, still astonished at all he had seen, at all he had suffered, and still more at the old woman's charity, wanted to kiss her hand. “It is not my hand that you must kiss,” said the old woman; I will come back tomorrow. Rub yourself with ointment, eat and sleep. »
Candide, despite so many misfortunes, ate and slept. The next day the old woman brings him lunch, inspects his back, rubs it herself with another ointment; she then brings him dinner; she returns in the evening, and brings supper. Two days later she performed the same ceremonies again. " Who are you? Candide always said to him; who inspired you with so much goodness? what thanks can I give you? The good woman never answered anything; she returned in the evening and brought no supper. “Come with me,” she said, “and don't say a word. She takes him under the arm, and walks with him through the country for about a quarter of a mile: they come to an isolated house, surrounded by gardens and canals. The old woman knocks on a small door. We open; she leads Candide, by a hidden staircase, into a gilded cabinet, leaves him on a brocade sofa, closes the door, and leaves. Candide thought he was dreaming, and regarded his whole life as a fatal dream, and the present moment as a pleasant dream.
The old woman soon reappeared; she supported with difficulty a trembling woman, of a majestic figure, shining with jewels and covered with a veil. "Take off that veil," said the old woman to Candide. The young man approaches; he lifts the veil with a timid hand. What moment! What a surprise! he thinks he sees Mademoiselle Cunégonde; he saw her indeed, it was herself. His strength fails him, he cannot utter a word, he falls at her feet. Cunégonde falls on the couch. The old woman overwhelms them with spirituous waters; they come back to their senses, they talk to each other: first of all there are interrupted words, requests and answers that intersect, sighs, tears, cries. The old woman advises them to make less noise, and leaves them free. " What! it's you, said Candide to him, you live! I'll meet you in Portugal! So you weren't raped? Haven't they slit your belly, as the philosopher Pangloss assured me? "Yes," said the beautiful Cunégonde; but one does not always die of these two accidents. "But were your father and mother killed?" "It is only too true," said Cunégonde, weeping. "And your brother?" “My brother was killed too. "And why are you in Portugal?" and how did you know I was there? and by what strange adventure have you brought me to this house? "I will tell you all that," replied the lady; but first you must tell me everything that has happened to you since the innocent kiss you gave me and the kicks you received. »
Candide obeys him with profound respect; and although he was taken aback, although his voice was weak and trembling, although his spine still hurt a little, he told her in the most naive way all that he had experienced since the moment of their separation. Cunegonde raised her eyes to heaven; she gave tears at the death of the good Anabaptist and of Pangloss; after which she spoke in these terms to Candide, who did not miss a word, and who devoured her with his eyes.
Chapter 8
History of Cunégonde.
“I was in my bed and sleeping soundly, when it pleased Heaven to send the Bulgarians to our beautiful castle of Thunder-ten-tronckh; they slaughtered my father and my brother, and cut my mother to pieces. A tall Bulgarian, six feet tall, seeing that at this spectacle I had lost consciousness, began to rape me; it made me come back, I regained my senses, I screamed, I struggled, I bit, I scratched, I wanted to scratch the eyes out of this big Bulgarian, not knowing that everything that happened in my father's castle was a usual thing: the brutal stabbed me in the left flank, the mark of which I still bear. — Alas! I really hope to see her, said the naive Candide. "You will see her," said Cunégonde; but let's continue. "Go on," said Candide.
She thus resumed the thread of her story: “A Bulgarian captain entered, he saw me all bleeding, and the soldier did not disturb himself. The captain got angry at the lack of respect shown to him by this brute, and killed him on my body. Then he had me bandaged, and took me as a prisoner of war to his quarters. I laundered the few shirts he had, I did his cooking; he found me very pretty, it must be confessed; and I will not deny that he was very well made, and that his skin was white and soft; besides, little wit, little philosophy: it was clear that he had not been brought up by Doctor Pangloss. At the end of three months, having lost all his money and being disgusted with me, he sold me to a Jew named Don Issacar, who traded in Holland and Portugal, and who loved women passionately. This Jew attached himself very much to my person, but he could not triumph over it; I resisted him better than the Bulgarian soldier. A person of honor may be violated once, but his virtue is strengthened. The Jew, to tame me, took me to that country house you see. I had believed until then that there was nothing on earth so beautiful as the castle of Thunder-ten-tronckh; I was deceived.
“The Grand Inquisitor saw me one day at Mass, he eyed me a lot, and told me that he had to speak to me on secret business. I was taken to his palace; I informed him of my birth; he represented to me how much below my rank it was to belong to an Israelite. It was proposed on his part to Don Issacar to give me up to my lord. Don Issachar, who is the court banker and man of credit, would have nothing to do with it. The inquisitor threatened him with an auto-da-fé. Finally my intimidated Jew made a deal whereby the house and I would belong to them both in common: that the Jew would have Mondays, Wednesdays and the Sabbath day for himself, and that the inquisitor would have the other days of the week. This agreement has been in existence for six months. It was not without quarrels; for often it has been undecided whether the night from Saturday to Sunday belonged to the old law or to the new. For me, I have so far resisted both, and I believe that is why I have always been loved.
“Finally, to avert the scourge of earthquakes, and to intimidate Don Issacar, it pleased Monsignor the Inquisitor to celebrate an auto-da-fé. He did me the honor of inviting me. I was very well placed; refreshments were served to the ladies between the mass and the execution. I was, in truth, seized with horror on seeing these two Jews and this honest Vizcayan who had married his gossip burned; but what was my surprise, my terror, my confusion, when I saw, in a san-benito and under a miter, a face which resembled that of Pangloss! I rubbed my eyes, I looked attentively, I saw him hanging; I fell into weakness. Hardly had I regained my senses than I saw you stripped naked: this was the height of horror, consternation, pain, despair. I will tell you, with truth, that your skin is still whiter and of a more perfect incarnate color than that of my captain of the Bulgarians. This sight redoubled all the feelings that overwhelmed me, that devoured me. I cried out, I wanted to say: “Stop, barbarians! but my voice failed me, and my cries would have been useless. When you had been well spanked: "How can it be, I said, that the amiable Candide and the wise Pangloss are in Lisbon, one to receive a hundred lashes, and the other to be hanged? by order of the Inquisitor, whose beloved I am? Pangloss therefore cruelly deceived me when he told me that everything was going for the best in the world. »
“Agitated, distraught, sometimes beside myself, and sometimes ready to die of weakness, my head was filled with the massacre of my father, my mother, my brother, the insolence of my ugly Bulgarian soldier, of the stab he gave me, of my servitude, of my job as a cook, of my Bulgarian captain, of my ugly Don Issachar, of my abominable inquisitor, of the hanging of Doctor Pangloss, of that great misery in false drone during which you were spanked, and above all of the kiss I had given you behind a screen the day I had seen you for the last time. I praised God who brought you back to me through so many trials. I told my old lady to take care of you, and to bring you here as soon as she could. She executed my commission very well; I tasted the inexpressible pleasure of seeing you again, of hearing you, of speaking to you. You must be voraciously hungry; I have a great appetite; let's start with dinner. »
There they are, both sitting down to table; and after supper, they sit down again on that beautiful sofa which we have already spoken of; they were there when Signor Don Issachar, one of the masters of the house, arrived. It was the Sabbath day. He came to enjoy his rights and explain his tender love.
Chapter 9
What happened to Cunégonde, Candide, the Grand Inquisitor and a Jew.
This Issachar was the most angry Hebrew that had been seen in Israel since the captivity in Babylon. " What! he said, female dog of the Galilean, isn't Monsieur the Inquisitor enough? Must this rascal also share with me? Saying this, he draws a long dagger with which he was always provided, and not believing that his opposing party had arms, he throws himself on Candide; but our good Vestphalian had received a beautiful sword from the old woman with the full coat. He draws his sword, although his morals are very gentle, and stretches out to you the stiff Israelite dead on the floor, at the feet of the beautiful Cunegonde.
" Holy Virgin! she exclaimed, what will become of us? A man killed in my house! if justice comes, we are lost. "If Pangloss had not been hanged," said Candide, "he would give us good advice in this extremity, for he was a great philosopher. Failing that, let's consult the old woman. She was very cautious, and was beginning to speak her mind, when another little door opened. It was one hour after midnight, it was the beginning of Sunday. This day belonged to Monsignor the Inquisitor. He enters and sees the spanked Candide, sword in hand, a corpse stretched out on the ground, Cunégonde terrified, and the old woman giving advice.
Here is what passed in the soul of Candide at that moment, and how he reasoned: “If this holy man calls for help, he will infallibly cause me to be burned; he will be able to do the same with Cunégonde; he whipped me mercilessly; he is my rival; I am killing, there is no questioning. This reasoning was clear and quick, and without giving the inquisitor time to recover from his surprise, he pierced him further and threw him beside the Jew. “Here is quite another,” said Cunégonde; there is no longer any remission; we are excommunicated, our last hour has come. How did you manage, you who were born so gentle, to kill a Jew and a prelate in two minutes? "My beautiful young lady," replied Candide, "when one is in love, jealous and whipped by the Inquisition, one no longer knows one another. »
The old woman then spoke and said: “There are three Andalusian horses in the stable, with their saddles and their bridles: let the brave Candide prepare them; madame has moyadors and diamonds: let's get on horseback quickly, although I can only stand on one buttock, and go to Cadiz; it is the most beautiful weather in the world, and it is a great pleasure to travel during the cool of the night. »
Immediately Candide saddles the three horses. Cunégonde, the old woman and he cover thirty miles in one go. As they were walking away, Saint Hermandad comes into the house; Monsignor is buried in a beautiful church, and Issacar is thrown into the garbage dump.
Candide, Cunégonde and the old woman were already in the little town of Avacéna, in the middle of the mountains of the Sierra-Morena; and they talked like that in a cabaret.
Chapter 10
In what distress Candide, Cunégonde and the old woman arrive at Cadiz, and from their embarkation.
"Who could have stolen my pistoles and my diamonds?" said Cunégonde, weeping; what will we live on? how shall we do? where to find inquisitors and Jews who give me others? — Alas! said the old woman, I strongly suspect a Reverend Father Cordelier who slept yesterday in the same inn as us in Badajoz; God keep me from making a rash judgment! but he entered our room twice, and left long before us. — Alas! said Candide, the good Pangloss had often proved to me that the goods of the earth are common to all men, that each has an equal right to them. This Cordelier was bound, according to these principles, to leave us enough to complete our journey. So you have nothing left at all, my beautiful Cunegonde. 'Not a Maravedis,' she said. "Which side to take?" said Candide. "Let's sell one of the horses," said the old woman; I'll mount up behind mademoiselle, although I can only stand on one buttock, and we'll arrive at Cadiz. »
There was in the same hostelry a Benedictine prior; he bought the horse cheap. Candide, Cunégonde and the old woman passed through Lucena, Chillas, Lebrixa, and finally arrived at Cadiz. A fleet was equipped there, and troops were assembled there to bring to their senses the reverend Jesuit fathers of Paraguay, who were accused of having caused one of their hordes to revolt against the kings of Spain and Portugal, near the city of the Blessed Sacrament. Candide, having served with the Bulgarians, carried out the Bulgarian exercise before the general of the small army with so much grace, celerity, address, pride, agility, that he was given a company of infantry to order. There he is, captain; he embarks with Miss Cunégonde, the old woman, two servants and the two Andalusian horses which had belonged to the Grand Inquisitor of Portugal.
During the whole crossing they reasoned a great deal about the philosophy of poor Pangloss. "We are going to another universe," said Candide; it is in this no doubt that all is well. Because we must admit that we could moan a little about what is happening in ours in physics and morals. "I love you with all my heart," said Cunégonde; but my soul is still startled by what I have seen, by what I have experienced. "Everything will be fine," replied Candide; the sea of this new world is already better than the seas of our Europe; it is calmer, the winds more constant. It is certainly the new world which is the best of the possible universes. "God grant it!" said Cunégonde; but I have been so horribly unhappy in mine that my heart is almost closed to hope. "You are complaining," said the old woman to them; Alas! you have not experienced such misfortunes as mine. Cunégonde almost laughed, and found this good woman very amusing in pretending to be more unhappy than herself. “Alas! she said to her, my dear, unless you were raped by two Bulgarians, you were stabbed twice in the stomach, two of your castles were demolished, have not slaughtered in your eyes two mothers and two fathers, and that you have not seen two of your lovers whipped in an auto-da-fe, I do not see that you can prevail over me; add that I was born a baroness with seventy-two quarters, and that I have been a cook. 'Mademoiselle,' replied the old woman, 'you don't know what my birth is; and if I showed you my behind, you would not speak as you do, and you would suspend your judgment. This speech aroused extreme curiosity in the minds of Cunegonde and Candide. The old woman spoke to them in these terms.
Chapter 11
History of the old.
“I haven’t always had scratchy, scarlet-rimmed eyes; my nose has not always touched my chin, and I have not always been a servant. I am the daughter of Pope Urban X, and the Princess of Palestine. I was brought up until I was fourteen in a palace to which all the castles of your German barons would not have served as stables; and one of my dresses was worth more than all the magnificence of Vestphalia. I grew in beauty, in graces, in talents, in the midst of pleasures, respects and hopes. I was already inhaling love, my throat was forming; and what a throat! white, firm, cut like that of the Venus de Medici; and what eyes! what eyelids! what black eyebrows! what flames shone in my two pupils, and effaced the scintillation of the stars, as the poets of the district told me. The women who dressed me and undressed me fell into ecstasy looking at me from the front and the back, and all the men wanted to be in their place.
“I was engaged to a sovereign prince of Massa-Carrara. What a prince! as beautiful as I am, steeped in sweetness and charm, brilliant in spirit and burning with love. I loved him as one loves for the first time, with idolatry, with anger. The wedding was prepared. It was a pomp, an unheard-of magnificence; there were parties, carousels, continual opera buffa; and all Italy wrote sonnets for me of which there was not a single passable one. I was nearing the moment of my happiness, when an old marquise who had been my prince's mistress invited him to take some chocolate with her. He died in less than two hours with terrible convulsions. But this is only a trifle. My mother, in despair, and much less afflicted than I, wanted to tear herself away for some time from such a fatal stay. She had a very beautiful land near Gaeta. We embarked on a local galley, gilded like the altar of St. Peter's in Rome. Now a corsair from Salé swoops down on us and approaches us. Our soldiers defended themselves like soldiers of the pope: they all knelt down, throwing down their arms, and asking the corsair for absolution in articulo mortis.
“Immediately they stripped them naked like monkeys, and my mother too, our maids of honor too, and me too. It is an admirable thing, the diligence with which these gentlemen undress the world. But what surprised me more was that they put the finger on all of us in a place where we women usually only allow ourselves to be put in cannulas. This ceremony seemed very strange to me: that's how you judge everything when you haven't left your country. I soon learned that it was to see if we had not hidden some diamonds there: it is a custom established from time immemorial among well-regulated nations that run on the sea. I learned that MM. the religious knights of Malta never miss it when they take Turks and Turks; it is a law of international law which has never been derogated from.
“I will not tell you how hard it is for a young princess to be taken as a slave to Morocco with her mother. You can easily imagine how much we had to suffer in the corsair ship. My mother was still very beautiful; our maids of honor, our simple maids, had more charms than can be found in all Africa. For me, I was ravishing, I was beauty, grace itself, and I was a maiden; I was not one for long: this flower which had been reserved for the handsome Prince of Massa-Carrara was stolen from me by the corsair captain; he was an abominable negro, who still thought he was doing me a great deal of honour. Certainly, the Princess of Palestine and I had to be very strong to resist all that we experienced until our arrival in Morocco. But let's move on; these are things so common that they are not worth talking about.
“Morocco was swimming in blood when we arrived. Fifty sons of the Emperor Muley-Ishmael each had their party: which in effect produced fifty civil wars, of blacks against blacks, blacks against swarthy, swarthy against swarthy, mulattoes against mulattoes. It was a continual carnage throughout the extent of the empire.
“No sooner had we landed than blacks from a faction hostile to that of my corsair presented themselves to take away his booty. We were, after diamonds and gold, his most precious. I witnessed a fight such as you never see in your European climates. The northern peoples are not hot enough in blood. They do not have the rage of women to the point where it is common in Africa. It seems that your Europeans have milk in their veins; it is vitriol, it is fire that flows in those of the inhabitants of Mount Atlas and neighboring countries. We fought with the fury of the lions, tigers and serpents of the country, to know who would have us. A Moor grabbed my mother by the right arm, my captain's lieutenant held her back by the left arm; a Moorish soldier took her by one leg, one of our pirates held her by the other. Our daughters almost all found themselves fired upon like this by four soldiers. My captain kept me hidden behind him. He had the scimitar in his hand, and killed all that opposed his rage. Finally, I saw all our Italian women and my mother torn, cut, massacred by the monsters who disputed them. The captives my companions, those who had taken them, soldiers, sailors, blacks, swarthy, whites, mulattoes, and finally my captain, all were killed; and I lay dying on a heap of the dead. Similar scenes took place, as we know, in the expanse of more than three hundred leagues, without any failure in the five prayers a day ordered by Mahomet.
“I got rid with great difficulty of the crowd of so many bloody corpses piled up, and I dragged myself under a large orange tree at the edge of a nearby stream; I fell into it with fright, weariness, horror, despair and hunger. Soon after, my overwhelmed senses fell into a sleep that was more like fainting than rest. I was in this state of weakness and insensitivity, between death and life, when I felt pressed by something which stirred on my body. I opened my eyes, I saw a white, good-looking man who was sighing and saying between his teeth: O che sciagura d'essere senza coglioni!
Chapter 12
Continuation of the misfortunes of the old woman.
“Amazed and delighted to hear the language of my country, and no less surprised at the words that this man uttered, I answered him that there were greater misfortunes than the one of which he complained. I informed him in a few words of the horrors I had suffered, and I fell back into weakness. He took me to a neighboring house, put me to bed, fed me, served me, consoled me, flattered me, told me that he had never seen anything so beautiful as me, and that he never had regretted so much what no one could return to him. "I was born in Naples," he told me, "two or three thousand children are kept there every year; some die of it, others acquire a voice more beautiful than that of women, others go to govern the States. This operation was performed on me with great success, and I was a musician in the chapel of the Princess of Palestine. - From my mother! I exclaimed. "From your mother!" he cried, crying. What! you would be this young princess whom I raised until the age of six, and who already promised to be as beautiful as you are? - It is me; my mother is four hundred paces from here, cut into quarters under a heap of dead…”
“I told him everything that had happened to me; he also related his adventures to me, and told me how he had been sent to the King of Morocco by a Christian power, to conclude a treaty with this monarch, by which they would supply him with gunpowder, cannons and ships, to help him to exterminate the trade of other Christians. “My mission is done,” said this honest eunuch to me; I am going to embark at Ceuta, and I will bring you back to Italy. Ma che sciagura d’essere senza coglioni!”
“I thanked him with tears of tenderness; and instead of taking me to Italy, he took me to Algiers, and sold me to the dey of that province. No sooner had I been sold than this plague which made the rounds of Africa, Asia and Europe, broke out in Algiers with fury. You have seen earthquakes; but, Mademoiselle, have you ever had the plague?
"Never," replied the Baroness.
"If you had had her," resumed the old woman, "you would confess that she is far beyond an earthquake." It is very common in Africa; I was attacked. Imagine the situation for the daughter of a pope, aged fifteen, who in three months had experienced poverty, slavery, had been raped almost every day, had seen her mother cut in four, had suffered hunger and war, and died plagued in Algiers. However, I did not die. But my eunuch and the dey, and almost all the seraglio of Algiers, perished.
“When the first ravages of this terrible plague were over, the slaves of the dey were sold. A merchant bought me and took me to Tunis, he sold me to another merchant, who resold me in Tripoli; from Tripoli I was resold to Alexandria, from Alexandria resold to Smyrna, from Smyrna to Constantinople. I finally belonged to an aga of the Janissaries, who was soon ordered to go and defend Azof against the Russians who were besieging it.
“The aga, who was a very gallant man, took his entire seraglio with him, and lodged us in a small fort on the Palus-Meotides, guarded by two black eunuchs and twenty soldiers. We killed a prodigious number of Russians, but they paid us well. Azof was put to fire and sword, and neither sex nor age were forgiven; only our little fort remained; the enemies wanted to starve us. The twenty Janissaries had sworn never to surrender. The extremities of hunger to which they were reduced compelled them to eat our two eunuchs, lest they violate their oath. After a few days, they resolved to eat the women.
“We had a very pious and very compassionate imam, who gave them a beautiful sermon in which he persuaded them not to kill us altogether. 'Cut,' he said, 'only a buttock from each of these ladies, you will make very good food; if you have to come back to it, you will have as many more in a few days; Heaven will be grateful to you for such a charitable action, and you will be helped. »
“He had a lot of eloquence; he persuaded them. They performed this horrible operation on us. The imam applied the same balm to us that we put on children who have just been circumcised. We were all dead.
“As soon as the Janissaries had cooked the meal we had provided them with, the Russians arrived on flat boats; he did not escape a Janissary. The Russians paid no attention to our condition. There are French surgeons everywhere: one of them, who was very skilful, took care of us; he heals us, and I will remember all my life that, when the wounds were well closed, he made me proposals. Besides, he tells us all to console ourselves; he assured us that in several sieges the same thing had happened, and that it was the law of war.
“As soon as my companions could walk, they were sent to Moscow. I fell in share to a boyar who made me his gardener, and who gave me twenty lashes a day. But this lord having been beaten after two years with about thirty boyars for some court hassle, I took advantage of this adventure; I am running away; I crossed the whole of Russia; I was a cabaret servant for a long time in Riga, then in Rostock, in Vismar, in Leipsick, in Cassel, in Utrecht, in Leyden, in The Hague, in Rotterdam: I grew old in misery and in opprobrium, never having only half a behind, always remembering that I was a pope's daughter; I wanted to kill myself a hundred times, but I still loved life. This ridiculous weakness is perhaps one of our most fatal inclinations; because is there anything more stupid than wanting to continually carry a burden that you always want to throw on the ground? to have his being in horror, and to cling to his being? finally to caress the serpent that devours us, until it has eaten our hearts?
“I saw in the countries that fate made me travel, and in the cabarets where I served, a prodigious number of people who had their existence in execration; but I have only seen twelve who have voluntarily put an end to their misery: three Negroes, four English, four Genevans and a German professor named Robeck. I ended up being a servant to the Jew don Issachar; he placed me near you, my beautiful young lady; I have attached myself to your destiny, and I have been more occupied with your adventures than with mine. I would never even have spoken to you of my misfortunes if you hadn't piqued me a little, and if it hadn't been customary in a ship to tell stories to get bored. Finally, mademoiselle, I have experience, I know the world; give yourself a treat, get each passenger to tell you their story; and if there is a single one who has not often cursed his life, who has not often said to himself that he was the most unfortunate of men, throw me head first into the sea. »
Chapter 13
How Candide was obliged to part with the beautiful Cunégonde and the old woman.
The beautiful Cunégonde, having heard the story of the old woman, paid her all the courtesies that one owed to a person of her rank and merit. She accepted the proposal; she urged all the passengers one after the other to tell her of their adventures. Candide and she confessed that the old woman was right. “It is a pity, said Candide, that the wise Pangloss was hanged against custom in an auto-da-fé; he would tell us admirable things about the physical evil and the moral evil that cover the land and the sea and I would feel strong enough to dare to raise a few objections to him respectfully. »
As everyone told their story, the ship moved forward. They landed in Buenos Ayres. Cunégonde, Captain Candide and the old woman went to Governor Don Fernando d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Mascarenes, y Lampourdos, y Souza. This lord had a pride befitting a man who bore so many names. He spoke to men with the noblest disdain, carrying his nose so high, raising his voice so pitilessly, assuming such an imposing tone, affecting such a haughty gait, that all who greeted him were tempted to beat him. He loved women to fury. Cunégonde seemed to him the most beautiful he had ever seen. The first thing he did was to ask if she was not the captain's wife. The air with which he made this question alarmed Candide: he dared not say that she was his wife, because in fact she was not; he didn't dare say it was his sister, because neither was she; and though this officious lie had formerly been very fashionable among the ancients, and might be useful to the moderns, his soul was too pure to betray the truth. "Miss Cunégonde," he said, "must do me the honor of marrying me, and we beg your Excellency to deign to do our wedding." »
Don Fernando d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Mascarenes, y Lampourdos, y Souza, raising his mustache, smiled bitterly, and ordered Captain Candide to go and review his company. Candide obeys; the governor stayed with Mademoiselle Cunégonde. He declared his passion to her, protested to her that the next day he would marry her in front of the Church, or otherwise, as her charms pleased. Cunégonde asked her for a quarter of an hour to collect herself, to consult the old woman and to make up her mind.
The old woman said to Cunégonde: “Mademoiselle, you have seventy-two quarters, and not an obol; it is up to you to be the wife of the greatest lord of South America, who has a very beautiful mustache; is it up to you to pride yourself on unfailing fidelity? You were raped by the Bulgarians; a Jew and an inquisitor have had your good graces: misfortunes give rights. I confess that, if I were in your place, I would have no scruple about marrying the Governor and making the fortune of Captain Candide. While the old woman was talking with all the prudence that age and experience give, a small vessel was seen entering the port; he wore an alcalde and alguazils, and this is what happened:
The old woman had guessed very well that it was a Cordelier with a long sleeve who stole Cunégonde's money and jewels in the town of Badajoz, when she was fleeing in haste with Candide. This monk wanted to sell some of the gems to a jeweler. The merchant recognized them as those of the Grand Inquisitor. The Cordelier, before being hanged, confessed that he had stolen them; he indicated the people and the route they were taking. The flight of Cunégonde and Candide was already known. They were followed to Cadiz; without wasting time, a ship was sent in pursuit. The ship was already in the port of Buenos Ayres. A rumor spread that an alcald was about to disembark, and that the murderers of Monseigneur the Grand Inquisitor were being pursued. The prudent old woman immediately saw all that had to be done. “You cannot flee,” she said to Cunégonde, “and you have nothing to fear; it was not you who killed my lord; and besides, the governor, who loves you, will not allow you to be mistreated; remain. She runs immediately to Candide: "Flee," she said, "or you'll be burned in an hour." There was not a moment to lose; but how to separate from Cunégonde, and where to take refuge?
Chapter 14
How Candide and Cacambo were received by the Jesuits in Paraguay.
Candide had brought from Cadiz a valet such as one finds many on the coasts of Spain and in the colonies. He was a quarter Spaniard, born of a mestizo in Tucuman; he had been an altar boy, sacristan, sailor, monk, postman, soldier, lackey. His name was Cacambo, and he loved his master very much because his master was a very good man. He quickly saddled the two Andalusian horses. “Come, my master, let us follow the advice of the old woman; let's go, and run without looking behind us. Candide shed tears. “O my dear Cunégonde! must we abandon you while the Governor is about to make our wedding! Cunégonde brought from so far away, what will become of you? "She will become what she can," said Cacambo; women are never embarrassed by them; God provides it; let's run. "Where are you taking me?" Where are we going? what will we do without Cunégonde? said Candide. 'By Saint Jacques de Compostela,' said Cacambo, 'you were going to make war on the Jesuits; let's do it for them: I know the roads well enough, I'll take you to their kingdom, they'll be delighted to have a captain who does the Bulgarian drill; you will make a prodigious fortune; when you don't have your account in one world, you find it in another. It is a great pleasure to see and do new things.
"So you've already been to Paraguay?" said Candide. - Really yes! said Cacambo; I was a pedant in the College of the Assumption, and I know the government of Los Padres as I know the streets of Cadiz. This government is an admirable thing. The kingdom is already more than three hundred leagues in diameter; it is divided into thirty provinces. The Padres have everything there, and the people nothing; it is the masterpiece of reason and justice. For me, I see nothing so divine as Los Padres, who here make war on the King of Spain and the King of Portugal, and who in Europe confess these kings; who kill Spaniards here, and who in Madrid send them to heaven: that delights me; let's move on; you are going to be the happiest of all men. What a treat Los Padres will have when they know they've got a captain who knows the Bulgarian drill! »
As soon as they arrived at the first barrier, Cacambo told the advanced guard that a captain wanted to speak to the commander. We went to warn the main guard. A Paraguayan officer ran to the commander's feet to tell him the news. Candide and Cacambo were first disarmed; they seize their two Andalusian horses. The two strangers are introduced in the middle of two files of soldiers; the commander was at the end, the three-cornered cap on his head, his robe rolled up, sword at his side, spear in hand. He made a sign; immediately twenty-four soldiers surrounded the two newcomers. A sergeant tells them that they must wait, that the commander cannot speak to them, that the reverend father provincial does not allow any Spaniard to open his mouth except in his presence, and to remain more than three hours in the country. "And where is the Reverend Father Provincial?" Cacambo said. "He is on parade after saying his mass," replied the sergeant; and you won't be able to kiss his spurs for three hours. “But,” said Cacambo, “Captain, who is starving like me, is not Spanish, he is German; could we not have lunch while waiting for his Reverence? »
The sergeant immediately went to report this speech to the commandant. “God be blessed! said this lord; since he is German, I can talk to him; let him be led into my lane. Immediately Candide was led into a green room adorned with a very pretty colonnade of green and gold marble, and trellises which contained parrots, hummingbirds, hummingbirds, guinea fowl, and all the rarest birds. An excellent breakfast was prepared in golden vessels; and while the Paraguayans ate corn from wooden bowls, in the open field, in the heat of the sun, the reverend father commander entered the field.
He was a very handsome young man, full-faced, fairly white, colorful, eyebrows raised, eyes bright, ears red, lips vermilion, a proud air, but with a pride that did not It was neither that of a Spaniard nor that of a Jesuit. They returned to Candide and Cacambo their arms, which had been seized from them, as well as the two Andalusian horses; Cacambo made them eat the oats near the leafy ground, always keeping an eye on them, for fear of surprise.
Candide first kissed the bottom of the commandant's robe, then they sat down to table. "So you are German?" said the Jesuit to him in that language. "Yes, my Reverend Father," said Candide. Both of them, while pronouncing these words, looked at each other with extreme surprise and an emotion of which they were not the masters. “And which country of Germany are you from? said the Jesuit. — From the filthy province of Vestphalia, said Candide: I was born in the castle of Thunder-ten-tronckh. — O heaven! Is it possible? cried the commander. - What a miracle! exclaimed Candide. "Could it be you?" said the commander. "That is not possible," said Candide. They both fall backwards, they kiss, they shed streams of tears. " What! would it be you, my Reverend Father? you, the brother of the beautiful Cunégonde! you, who were killed by the Bulgarians! you, the son of Monsieur le Baron! you, Jesuit in Paraguay! We must admit that this world is a strange thing. O Pangloss! Pangloss! how glad you would be if you had not been hanged! »
The commandant had the negro slaves and the Paraguayans removed, who served to drink from rock crystal goblets. He thanked God and Saint Ignatius a thousand times; he hugged Candide in his arms; their faces were bathed in tears. "You would be much more astonished, more moved, more beside yourself," said Candide, "if I told you that Mademoiselle Cunégonde, your sister, whom you thought had been disemboweled, is in good health. - Or? — In your neighborhood, with the governor of Buenos-Ayres; and I came to make war on you. Every word they uttered in this long conversation accumulated prodigy upon prodigy. Their whole soul flew on their tongue, was attentive in their ears and sparkling in their eyes. As they were Germans, they sat down to table for a long time, while waiting for the Reverend Father Provincial; and the Commandant thus spoke to his dear Candide.
Chapter 15
How Candide killed the brother of his dear Cunégonde.
“I will remember all my life the horrible day when I saw my father and my mother killed and my sister raped. When the Bulgarians were withdrawn, they did not find this adorable sister, and they put my mother, my father and myself, two servants and three little boys with their throats slit in a cart, to go and bury us in a Jesuit chapel, two leagues from the castle of my fathers. A Jesuit threw holy water at us; it was horribly salty; a few drops of it entered my eyes; the father noticed that my eyelid moved a little: he put his hand on my heart and felt it throb; I was rescued, and at the end of three weeks he did not appear there. You know, my dear Candide, that I was very pretty, I became even more so; also the Reverend Father Croust, superior of the house, took the most tender friendship for me; he gave me the novice's habit; some time later I was sent to Rome. Father General needed a recruit of young German Jesuits. The sovereigns of Paraguay receive as few Spanish Jesuits as they can; they are more fond of strangers, of whom they believe themselves more masters. I was deemed suitable by the Reverend Father General to go and work in this vineyard. We left, a Pole, a Tyrolean and me. I was honored, on arriving, with the sub-diaconate and a lieutenancy; today I am a colonel and a priest. We will vigorously receive the troops of the King of Spain; I answer you that they will be excommunicated and beaten. Providence sends you here to assist us. But is it really true that my dear sister Cunégonde is in the neighborhood, with the governor of Buenos-Ayres? Candide assured him on oath that nothing could be truer. Their tears started to flow again.
The baron could not get tired of kissing Candide, he called him his brother, his saviour. “Oh! perhaps, he said to him, we can together, my dear Candide, enter the city as conquerors, and recapture my sister Cunégonde. "That's all I want," said Candide; for I intended to marry her, and I still hope so. "You insolent!" answered the baron, you would have the impudence to marry my sister who has seventy-two quarters! I find you very brazen to dare to speak to me of such a rash design! Candide, petrified by such a speech, answered him: “My Reverend Father, all the quarters of the world are doing nothing about it; I rescued your sister from the arms of a Jew and an inquisitor; she has enough obligations to me, she wants to marry me. Master Pangloss has always told me that men are equal, and I will certainly marry him. "That's what we'll see, rascal!" said the Jesuit Baron of Thunder-ten-tronckh, and at the same time gave him a great blow with the flat of his sword in the face. Candide instantly pulls his own and thrusts it to the hilt into the belly of the Jesuit baron; but, as he took it out smoking, he began to cry: “Alas! my God, he said, I killed my former master, my friend, my brother-in-law; I am the best man in the world, and I have already killed three men; and in these three there are two priests. »
Cacambo, who was sentry at the door of the lane, hastened up. "All we have to do is sell our lives dearly," his master told him: "we're probably going to enter the thicket, we have to die, arms in hand. Cacambo, who had seen many others, did not lose his head; he took the Jesuit's robe which the baron wore, put it on Candide's body, gave him the dead man's square cap, and made him mount his horse. It all happened in the blink of an eye. “Let us gallop, my master; everyone will take you for a Jesuit who is going to give orders; and we will have crossed the borders before anyone can chase after us. He was already flying as he uttered these words, and shouted in Spanish: "Place, place for the Reverend Father Colonel." »
Chapter 16
What happened to the two travelers with two girls, two monkeys and the savages named Oreillons.
Candide and his valet were beyond the barriers, and no one in the camp yet knew of the death of the German Jesuit. The vigilant Cacambo had taken care to fill his suitcase with bread, chocolate, ham, fruit, and a few measures of wine. They plunged with their Andalusian horses into an unknown country, where they found no road. Finally a beautiful meadow interspersed with streams presented itself in front of them. Our two travelers feed their mounts. Cacambo offers his master to eat, and gives him the example. "How do you want me to eat ham, said Candide, when I killed Monsieur le Baron's son, and see myself condemned never to see the beautiful Cunégonde again in my life? what good will it do me to prolong my miserable days, since I must drag them away from her in remorse and despair? and what will the Journal de Trévoux say? »
Speaking thus, he did not stop eating. The sun was setting. The two strays heard a few small cries which seemed to be uttered by women. They did not know if these cries were of pain or of joy; but they got up hastily with that uneasiness and that alarm which everything inspires in an unknown country. These shouts came from two naked girls running lightly along the edge of the meadow, while two monkeys followed them, biting their buttocks. Candide was touched with pity; he had learned to shoot with the Bulgarians, and he would have cut down a nut in a bush without touching the leaves. He takes his Spanish double-barreled gun, shoots, and kills the two monkeys. “God be praised, my dear Cacambo! I delivered these two poor creatures from a great peril; if I committed a sin by killing an inquisitor and a Jesuit, I made good on it by saving the lives of two girls. They are perhaps two young ladies of condition, and this adventure can bring us very great advantages in the country. »
He was going to continue, but his tongue went crippled when he saw these two girls kissing the two monkeys tenderly, bursting into tears on their bodies and filling the air with the most painful cries. “I did not expect such kindness of soul,” he finally said to Cacambo; who replied: “You have done a beautiful masterpiece there, my master; you have killed the two lovers of these young ladies. "Their lovers!" could it be possible? you are laughing at me, Cacambo; the way to believe you? “My dear master,” resumed Cacambo, “you are always astonished at everything; why do you find it so strange that in some countries there are monkeys who obtain the good graces of the ladies? They are quarter men, like I am quarter Spaniard. — Alas! resumed Candide, “I remember having heard Master Pangloss say that such accidents had formerly happened, and that these mixtures had produced agipans, fauns, satyrs; that several great personages of antiquity had seen it; but I took that for fables. "You must be convinced by now," said Cacambo, "that it is a truth, and you see how people who have not received a certain education use it; all I fear is that these ladies will do us some nasty business. »
These solid reflections induced Candide to leave the meadow and go into a wood. He supped there with Cacambo; and both, after cursing the Inquisitor of Portugal, the Governor of Buenos Ayres, and the Baron, fell asleep on moss. When they awoke, they felt that they could not move; the reason was that during the night the Oreillons, inhabitants of the country, to whom the two ladies had denounced them, had bound them with cords of tree bark. They were surrounded by about fifty naked Oreillons, armed with arrows, clubs and pebble axes: some were boiling a large cauldron; the others were preparing brooches, and all were shouting: "He's a Jesuit, he's a Jesuit!" we will be avenged, and we will cheer; let's eat Jesuit, let's eat Jesuit! »
"I told you, my dear master," exclaimed Cacambo sadly, "that these two girls would play a bad trick on us. Candide, perceiving the boiler and the spits, exclaimed, "We will certainly be roasted or boiled." Ah! what would Master Pangloss say if he saw how pure nature is made? All is well; fine, but I confess that it is very cruel to have lost Miss Cunégonde and to be spit on the spit by Oreillons. Cacambo never lost his head. "Don't despair of anything," he said to the desolate Candide; I understand a little the jargon of these peoples, I will speak to them. "Don't fail," said Candide, "to show them what a terrible inhumanity it is to cook men, and how un-Christian that is." »
"Gentlemen," said Cacambo, "so you intend to eat a Jesuit today: it is very well done; nothing is fairer than to treat one's enemies in this way. In fact, natural law teaches us to kill our neighbour, and this is how it is done all over the world. If we do not use the right to eat it, it is because we have enough to eat well; but you do not have the same resources as us; certainly it is better to eat one's enemies than to leave the fruit of one's victory to crows and ravens. But, gentlemen, you wouldn't want to eat your friends. You think you are going to spit a Jesuit, and it is your defender, it is the enemy of your enemies that you are going to roast. For me, I was born in your country; the gentleman you see is my master, and far from being a Jesuit, he has just killed a Jesuit, he bears his spoils: that is the subject of your mistake. To verify what I'm telling you, take his robe, take it to the first barrier of the kingdom of Los Padres; find out if my master did not kill a Jesuit officer. It will take you little time; you can always eat us if you find that I lied to you. But if I have told you the truth, you know too well the principles of public right, customs and laws, not to pardon us. »
The Oreillons found this speech very reasonable; they deputed two notables to go hastily to inquire into the truth; the two deputies acquitted themselves of their commission like men of intelligence, and soon returned with good news. The Oreillons untied their two prisoners, paid them all sorts of courtesies, offered them girls, gave them refreshments, and escorted them to the confines of their States, shouting with joy: "He is not a Jesuit, he is not a Jesuit. is not a Jesuit! »
Candide never tired of admiring the subject of his deliverance. “What people! he said, what men! what manners! if I hadn't had the good fortune to strike Miss Cunégonde's brother with a sword through the body, I would have been eaten without forgiveness. But, after all, pure nature is good, since these people, instead of eating me, showed me a thousand honesty as soon as they learned that I was not a Jesuit. »
Chapter 17
Arrival of Candide and his valet in the land of Eldorado, and what they saw there.
When they were at the borders of the Oreillons: "You see," said Cacambo to Candide, "that this hemisphere is no better than the other: believe me, let's return to Europe by the shortest route. "How to get back there?" said Candide, and where to go? if I go to my country, the Bulgarians and the Abarians slaughter everything there; if I return to Portugal, I am burned there; if we stay in this country, we risk being skewered at any moment. But how to resolve to leave the part of the world where Miss Cunégonde lives?
"Let us turn towards Cayenne," said Cacambo; they can help us. God may have mercy on us. »
It was not easy to go to Cayenne: they pretty much knew which way to walk; but mountains, rivers, precipices, brigands, savages, were everywhere terrible obstacles. Their horses died of fatigue; their provisions were consumed; they fed on wild fruits for a whole month, and finally found themselves near a small river bordered by coconut palms, which supported their life and their hopes.
Cacambo, who always gave advice as good as the old woman, said to Candide: “We can’t take it anymore, we’ve walked enough; I see an empty canoe on the shore, let's fill it with cocos, let's throw ourselves into this little boat, let's go with the flow; a river always leads to some inhabited place. If we don't find pleasant things, we will at least find new things. "Come on," said Candide, "let's commend ourselves to Providence." »
They sailed for a few leagues between shores that were sometimes flowery, sometimes arid, sometimes smooth, sometimes steep. The river kept widening; finally it was lost under a vault of terrible rocks which rose to the sky. The two travelers had the boldness to abandon themselves to the waves under this vault. The river, constricted in this place, carried them with a horrible rapidity and noise. At the end of twenty-four hours they saw the light again; but their canoe crashed against the rocks; we had to drag ourselves from rock to rock for a whole league; finally they discovered an immense horizon, bordered by inaccessible mountains. The country was cultivated for pleasure as well as for need; everywhere the useful was agreeable. The roads were covered, or rather adorned, with carriages of a brilliant shape and material, bearing men and women of singular beauty, dragged swiftly by great red sheep, which surpassed in speed the finest horses of Andalusia. , Tetuan and Méquinez.
"Here, however," said Candide, "is a country which is worth more than Vestphalia." He dismounted with Cacambo near the first village he came across. A few village children, covered in torn gold brocades, were playing shuffleboard at the entrance to the town; our two men from the other world amused themselves by looking at them: their pucks were quite large round pieces, yellow, red, green, which cast a singular brilliance. He made the travelers want to pick up some of them; it was gold, it was emeralds, rubies, the least of which would have been the greatest adornment of the Mogul throne. "No doubt," said Cacambo, "these children are the sons of the king of the country who play at small puck." The village magister appeared at this moment to send them back to school. "Here," said Candide, "the tutor of the royal family." »
The little beggars immediately left the game, leaving their pucks and everything that had been used for their entertainment on the ground. Candide picks them up, runs to the tutor, and presents them to him humbly, giving him to understand by signs that Their Royal Highnesses had forgotten their whereabouts and their precious stones. The village magister, smiling, threw them on the ground, looked for a moment at Candide's face with much surprise, and continued on his way.
Travelers did not fail to pick up gold, rubies and emeralds. " Where are we? exclaimed Candide; the children of the kings of this country must be well brought up, since they are taught to despise gold and precious stones. Cacambo was as surprised as Candide. They finally approached the first house in the village; it was built like a European palace. A crowd of people was hurrying to the door, and still more into the house. Very pleasant music was heard, and a delicious smell of cooking was felt. Cacambo approached the door, and heard that they were speaking Peruvian; it was his mother tongue: because everyone knows that Cacambo was born in Tucuman, in a village where only that language was known. “I will act as your interpreter,” he said to Candide; let's go in, this is a cabaret. »
Immediately two boys and two girls from the inn, dressed in cloth of gold, and their hair tied back with ribbons, invite them to sit down at the host's table. Four soups were served, each garnished with two parrots, a boiled contour which weighed two hundred pounds, two roasted monkeys of excellent taste, three hundred hummingbirds in one dish, and six hundred hummingbirds in another; exquisite stews, delicious pastries; all in dishes of a kind of rock crystal. The waiters and girls in the inn were pouring several liqueurs made from sugar cane.
The guests were for the most part merchants and carriers, all extremely polite, who put a few questions to Cacambo with the most circumspect discretion, and who answered his in a manner to satisfy him.
When the meal was over, Cacambo thought, like Candide, that he was paying his bill well by throwing on the host's table two of those large gold coins he had picked up; the host and hostess burst out laughing, and held each other's sides for a long time. At last they recovered themselves: “Gentlemen,” said the host, “we see very well that you are strangers; we are not accustomed to seeing them. Forgive us if we laughed when you offered us the pebbles of our highways in payment. You probably don't have any local currency, but you don't need to have any to dine here. All hostelries established for the convenience of commerce are paid for by the government. You had a bad meal here, because it is a poor village; but everywhere else you will be received as you deserve to be. Cacambo explained to Candide all the speeches of the host, and Candide listened to them with the same admiration and bewilderment as his friend Cacambo returned them. “What is this country, they both said, unknown to all the rest of the earth, and where all nature is of a species so different from ours? This is probably the country where everything is going well; because there absolutely must be some of this kind. And, whatever Master Pangloss may say, I have often noticed that everything was going rather badly in Vestphalia. »
Chapter 18
What they saw in the land of El Dorado.
Cacambo showed his host all his curiosity; the host said to him: “I am very ignorant, and I find myself well; but here we have an old man retired from the court, who is the most learned man in the kingdom, and the most communicative. Immediately he takes Cacambo to the old man. Candide now played only the second character, and accompanied his valet. They entered a very simple house, for the door was only silver, and the paneling of the apartments was only gold, but worked with such taste that the richest paneling did not efface it. The antechamber was, in truth, encrusted only with rubies and emeralds; but the order in which everything was arranged made up for this extreme simplicity.
The old man received the two strangers on a sofa quilted with hummingbird feathers, and presented them with liqueurs in diamond vases; whereupon he satisfied their curiosity in these terms:
"I am one hundred and seventy-two years old, and I learned from my late father, the king's squire, the astonishing revolutions in Peru which he had witnessed. The kingdom where we are is the ancient homeland of the Incas, who left it very imprudently to go and subjugate part of the world, and who were finally destroyed by the Spaniards.
“The princes of their family who remained in their native country were wiser; they ordered, with the consent of the nation, that no inhabitant should ever leave our little kingdom; and this is what has preserved our innocence and our happiness. The Spaniards had a confused knowledge of this country, they called it El Dorado, and an Englishman, named the Raleigh Knight, even approached it about a hundred years ago; but, as we are surrounded by unapproachable rocks and precipices, we have always been hitherto sheltered from the rapacity of the nations of Europe, who have an inconceivable rage for the pebbles and for the mire of our land. , and who, to have it, would kill us all to the last. »
The conversation was long; it rolled on the form of government, on morals, on women, on public spectacles, on the arts. Finally Candide, who always had a taste for metaphysics, made Cacambo ask if there was a religion in the country.
The old man blushed a little. "How then," said he, "can you doubt it?" Do you take us for ingrates? Cacambo humbly asked what the religion of Eldorado was. The old man blushed again. “Can there be two religions? he said; we have, I believe, the religion of everyone: we adore God from evening until morning. "Do you worship only one God?" said Cacambo, who always served as an interpreter of Candide's doubts. "Apparently," said the old man, "there are neither two, nor three, nor four." I confess to you that the people of your world ask very strange questions. Candide never tired of having this good old man questioned; he wanted to know how they prayed to God in Eldorado. “We do not pray to him,” said the good and respectable sage; we have nothing to ask him; he has given us everything we need; we thank him unceasingly. Candide was curious to see priests; he asked where they were. The good old man smiled. “My friends,” he said, “we are all priests; the king and all the heads of families sing hymns of thanksgiving solemnly every morning; and five or six thousand musicians accompany them. - What! you have no monks who teach, who dispute, who govern, who cabal, and who burn people who are not of their opinion? "We must be mad," said the old man; we are all of the same opinion here, and we do not hear what you mean with your monks. Candide at all these speeches remained in ecstasy, and said to himself: "This is very different from Vestphalia and from Monsieur le Baron's castle: if our friend Pangloss had seen Eldorado, he would have said only the castle of Thunder-ten-tronckh was the best on earth; it is certain that it is necessary to travel. »
After this long conversation, the good old man had a coach harnessed with six sheep, and gave twelve of his servants to the two travelers to drive them to court. honor to accompany you. The King will receive you in a manner with which you will not be displeased, and you will no doubt forgive the customs of the country if there are any which displease you. »
Candide and Cacambo get into the carriage; the six sheep were flying, and in less than four hours they arrived at the king's palace, situated at one end of the capital. The portal was two hundred and twenty feet high and one hundred wide; it is impossible to express what the matter was. It is easy enough to see what prodigious superiority it must have had over those pebbles and over that sand which we call ou and precious stones.
Twenty beautiful girls from the guard received Candide and Cacambo as they alighted from the carriage, led them to the baths, dressed them in dresses made of hummingbird down; after which the Grand Officers and Grand Officers of the Crown conducted them to His Majesty's apartment, in the midst of two files each of a thousand musicians, according to the usual custom. When they approached the throne room, Cacambo asked a grand officer how to go about saluting his Majesty; if we threw ourselves on our knees or belly to the ground; whether you put your hands on your head or on your behind; if one licked the dust from the hall; in a word, what was the ceremony. "The custom," said the grand officer, "is to embrace the king and to kiss him on both sides. Candide and Cacambo threw themselves on the neck of his Majesty, who received them with all imaginable grace and politely asked them to supper.
While waiting, they were shown the city, the public buildings raised to the clouds, the markets adorned with a thousand columns, the fountains of pure water, the fountains of pink water, those of sugar cane liquors, which flowed continually in large squares, paved with a kind of precious stones which gave off an odor similar to that of cloves and cinnamon. Candide asked to see the court of justice, the parliament; they told him that there was none, and that no one ever pleaded. He inquired if there were any prisons, and was told no. What surprised him the most, and gave him the most pleasure, was the Palace of Sciences, in which he saw a gallery two thousand paces long, full of mathematical and physical instruments.
After having traversed, all the afternoon, nearly a thousandth part of the city, they were brought back to the king. Candide sat down to table between his Majesty, his valet Cacambo, and several ladies. Never was there better food, and never was there more wit at supper than his Majesty had. Cacambo was explaining the king's witticisms to Candide, and although translated, they still seemed like witticisms. Of all that astonished Candide, this was not what astonished him the least.
They spent a month in this hospice. Candide kept saying to Cacambo: “It is true, my friend, once again, that the castle where I was born is not worth the country where we are; but anyway Miss Cunegonde is not there, and you have no doubt some mistress in Europe. If we stay here, we will only be there like the others; whereas if we return to our world with only twelve sheep laden with Eldorado pebbles, we shall be richer than all the kings together, we shall have no more inquisitors to fear, and we may easily recapture Miss Cunégonde. »
This speech pleased Cacambo: one likes so much to run, to show off at one's own, to show off what one has seen in one's travels, that the two happy people resolved not to be one anymore and to ask for their leave. to his Majesty.
“You are doing something stupid,” said the king to them; I know very well that my country is a small thing; but, when one is fairly somewhere, one must remain there; I certainly have no right to retain strangers; it is a tyranny which is neither in our manners nor in our laws: all men are free; leave when you want, but the exit is very difficult. It is impossible to go up the fast river on which you arrived by miracle, and which runs under vaults of rocks. The mountains which surround all my kingdom are ten thousand feet high, and are straight as walls; they each occupy in breadth a space of more than ten leagues; one can descend from it only by precipices. However, since you absolutely want to leave, I will order the stewards of the machines to make one that can transport you conveniently. When you have been taken to the back of the mountains, no one will be able to accompany you; for my subjects have vowed never to leave their enclosure, and they are too wise to break their vow. Besides, ask me whatever you please. "We only ask your Majesty," said Cacambo, "a few sheep laden with provisions, pebbles, and the mud of the country." The king laughs. “I do not conceive, he said, what taste your people of Europe have for our yellow mud; but take as much as you like, and great good will do you. »
He immediately ordered his engineers to make a machine to steer these two extraordinary men out of the kingdom. Three thousand good physicists worked there; it was ready at the end of a fortnight, and cost no more than twenty millions of pounds sterling, the currency of the country. Candide and Cacambo were put on the machine; there were two big red sheep saddled and bridled to serve as mounts for them when they had crossed the mountains, twenty pack sheep laden with provisions, thirty who carried the most curious presents in the country, and fifty laden with gold, precious stones and diamonds. The king tenderly embraced the two vagabonds.
It was a beautiful sight their departure, and the ingenious way in which they and their sheep were hoisted to the top of the mountains. The physicists took leave of them after having put them in safety, and Candide had no other desire and no other object than to present his sheep to Mademoiselle Cunégonde. "We have," he said, "enough to pay the governor of Buenos Ayres, if Miss Cunégonde can be put on a bounty." Let's march to Cayenne, embark, and then we'll see which kingdom we can buy. »
Chapter 19
What happened to them in Surinam, and how Candide got to know Martin.
The first day of our two travelers was quite pleasant. They were encouraged by the idea of seeing themselves possessor of more treasures than Asia, Europe and Africa could muster. Candide, transported, wrote Cunégonde's name on the trees. On the second day two of their sheep sank into marshes, and were damaged there with their loads; two other sheep died of fatigue a few days later; seven or eight then perished of hunger in a desert; others fell after a few days into precipices. Finally, after a hundred days of walking, they were left with only two sheep. Candide said to Cacambo: “My friend, you see how perishable the riches of this world are; there is nothing solid but virtue and the happiness of seeing Mademoiselle Cunégonde again. "I confess it," said Cacambo; but we still have two sheep left with more treasures than the King of Spain will ever have, and I see a city in the distance which I suspect to be Surinam, belonging to the Dutch. We are at the end of our troubles and at the beginning of our happiness. »
Approaching the town, they met a negro stretched out on the ground, with only half his coat on, that is to say, blue linen underpants; the poor man was missing his left leg and his right hand. “Hey, my God! said Candide to him in Dutch, what are you doing there, my friend, in the horrible state in which I see you? "I am expecting my master, Mr. Vanderdendur, the famous merchant," replied the negro. "Was it M. Vanderdendur," said Candide, "who treated you like this?" "Yes, sir," said the negro, "that's the custom." We are given linen boxer shorts for every item of clothing twice a year. When we are working on sweets, and the millstone catches our finger, they cut off our hand; when we want to run away, they cut off our leg: I found myself in both cases. This is how much you eat sugar in Europe. However, when my mother sold me ten Patagonian crowns on the coast of Guinea, she said to me: "My dear child, bless our fetishes, always adore them, they will make you live happily, you have the honor of being a slave of our lords the whites, and you thereby make the fortune of your father and your mother. Alas! I don't know if I made their fortune, but they didn't make mine. Dogs, monkeys and parrots are a thousand times less unhappy than us. The Dutch fetishes who converted me tell me every Sunday that we are all children of Adam, white and black. I am not a genealogist; but if these preachers are telling the truth, we are all first cousins. But you will admit to me that one cannot use it with one's parents in a more horrible way.
“O Pangloss! exclaimed Candide, you had not divined this abomination; it's all over, I'll have to give up your optimism in the end. — What is optimism? said Cacambo. — Alas! said Candide, it is the rage to maintain that all is well when one is badly. And he shed tears looking at his negro, and weeping he entered Surinam.
The first thing they inquire about is whether there is any ship in port that could be sent to Buenos Ayres. The one they approached was a Spanish boss who offered to make a fair deal with them. He arranged to meet them at a cabaret. Candide and the faithful Cacambo went there to wait for him with their two sheep.
Candide, who had his heart on his lips, told the Spaniard all his adventures, and confessed to him that he wanted to carry off Mademoiselle Cunégonde. "I'll be careful not to pass you by in Buenos Ayres," said the boss. "I'd be hanged and you too." The beautiful Cunégonde is Monseigneur's favorite mistress. It was love at first sight for Candide; he wept for a long time; finally he pulled Cacambo aside: “Here, my dear friend,” he said to him, “is what you must do. We each have five or six million diamonds in our pockets; you are more skilful than me; will pick up Miss Cunégonde in Buenos-Ayres. If the governor makes any difficulties, give him a million; if he does not surrender, give him two; you have not killed an inquisitor, you will not be mistrusted. I will equip another ship; I will wait for you in Venice; it is a free country where one has nothing to fear either from the Bulgarians, or the Abarians, or the Jews, or the inquisitors. Cacambo applauded this wise resolution. He was in despair at parting with a good master, who had become his intimate friend; but the pleasure of being useful to him prevailed over the pain of leaving him. They embraced while shedding tears. Candide advised him not to forget the good old woman. Cacambo left the same day: he was a very good man, this Cacambo.
Candide remained some time longer in Surinam, and waited until another patron wanted to take him and the two sheep he had left to Italy. He took servants, and bought all that he needed for a long journey; finally Mr. Vanderdendur, master of a large vessel, came to present himself to him. "How much do you want," he asked this man, "to lead me straight to Venice, me, my people, my luggage, and the two sheep here?" The boss agreed to ten thousand piastres. Candide did not hesitate.
" Oh! Oh! said the prudent Vanderdendur to himself, "this stranger is giving ten thousand piastres all at once!" he must be very rich. Then, returning a moment later, he signified that he could not leave for less than twenty thousand. " Well! you will have them,” says Candide.
- Yeah! whispered the merchant to himself, this man gives twenty thousand piastres as easily as ten thousand. He came back again, and said he couldn't take him to Venice for less than thirty thousand piastres. "So you will have thirty thousand," replied Candide.
- Oh! Oh! said the Dutch merchant to himself again, thirty thousand piastres cost this man nothing; no doubt the two sheep carry immense treasures; let's not insist any longer: let's get the thirty thousand piastres paid first, and then we'll see. Candide sold two small diamonds, the least of which was worth more than all the money the boss asked for. He paid it in advance. The two sheep were embarked. Candide followed in a small boat to join the vessel at the roadstead; the skipper takes his time, sets sail, starts; the wind favors it. Candide, distraught and amazed, soon loses sight of him. “Alas! he cried, "that's a trick worthy of the old world." He returns to the shore, wracked with pain; for in the end he had lost enough to make the fortune of twenty monarchs.
He goes to the Dutch judge; and as he was a little disturbed, he knocked roughly at the door; he enters, exposes his adventure, and shouts a little louder than was proper. The judge began by making him pay ten thousand piastres for the noise he had made. Then he listened to him patiently, promised to examine his case as soon as the merchant returned, and had himself paid another ten thousand piastres for the costs of the hearing.
This proceeding completed Candide's despair; he had, in truth, suffered misfortunes a thousand times more painful; but the sangfroid of the judge, and that of the patron from whom he was robbed, kindled his bile, and plunged him into a black melancholy. The wickedness of men presented itself to his mind in all its ugliness; he fed only on sad ideas. Finally, a French vessel being on the point of leaving for Bordeaux, as he had no more sheep laden with diamonds to embark, he rented a room in the vessel at a fair price, and made it known in the city that he would pay the passage. , food, and would give two thousand piastres to an honest man who would like to travel with him, on condition that this man would be the most disgusted with his condition and the most unfortunate in the province.
There arose a crowd of suitors that a fleet could not contain. Candide, wanting to choose between the most obvious, he singled out about twenty people who seemed to him quite sociable, and who all claimed to deserve the preference. He assembled them in his tavern, and gave them supper, on condition that each would swear to tell his story faithfully, promising to choose whoever seemed to him most to be pitied and most justly dissatisfied with his condition, and to give others some gratuities.
The meeting lasted until four o'clock in the morning. Candide, listening to all their adventures, remembered what the old woman had said to him on his way to Buenos-Ayres, and the bet she had made that there was no one on the ship whom he could not great misfortunes had happened. He thought of Pangloss in every adventure told to him. "This Pangloss," he said, "would be very embarrassed to demonstrate his system." I wish he were here. Certainly, if all goes well, it is in Eldorado, and not in the rest of the earth. Finally he decided in favor of a poor scholar who had worked ten years for the booksellers of Amsterdam. He judged that there was no profession in the world of which one should be more disgusted.
This scholar, who was also a good man, had been robbed by his wife, beaten by his son, and abandoned by his daughter who had been kidnapped by a Portuguese. He had just been deprived of a small employment from which he subsisted; and the preachers of Surinam persecuted him because they took him for a Socinian. It must be confessed that the others were at least as unhappy as he was; but Candide hoped that the scholar would relieve him on the journey. All his other rivals found that Candide did them a great injustice; but he appeased them by giving them each a hundred piastres.
Chapter 20
What happened at sea to Candide and Martin.
The old scholar, whose name was Martin, therefore embarked for Bordeaux with Candide. Both had seen much and suffered much; and when the ship should have sailed from Surinam to Japan by the Cape of Good Hope, they would have had enough to talk about moral and physical evil all the way.
Candide, however, had a great advantage over Martin, which was that he still hoped to see Miss Cunégonde again, and that Martin had nothing to hope for; moreover, he had gold and diamonds; and, although he had lost a hundred big red sheep laden with the greatest treasures on earth, although he still had in his heart the roguery of the Dutch patron, yet, when he thought of what was left in his pockets, and when he spoke of Cunégonde, especially at the end of the meal, he leaned then for the system of Pangloss.
"But you, Mr. Martin," he said to the scholar, "what do you think of all this?" What is your idea about moral evil and physical evil? “Sir,” replied Martin, “my priests have accused me of being a Socinian; but the truth of the matter is that I am Manichaean. "Are you kidding me," said Candide, "there are no more Manichaeans in the world." "There is me," said Martin; I don't know what to do about it, but I can't think otherwise. "You must have the devil in your body," said Candide. "He meddles so much in the affairs of this world," said Martin, "that he might well be in my body, as everywhere else; but I confess to you that on looking at this globe, or rather this globule, I think that God has abandoned it to some malevolent being; I always except Eldorado. I have hardly seen a city that did not want the ruin of the neighboring city, no family that did not want to exterminate some other family. Everywhere the weak loathe the powerful before whom they crawl, and the powerful treat them like flocks whose wool and flesh are sold. A million regimented assassins, running from one end of Europe to the other, practice murder and robbery with discipline to earn their bread, because there is no more honest profession; and in the cities which seem to enjoy peace and where the arts flourish, men are devoured by more envy, cares and anxieties than a besieged city experiences plagues. Secret sorrows are even more cruel than public miseries. In a word, I have seen so much, and experienced so much, that I am Manichean.
"Yet there is something good," replied Candide. "It may be," said Martin, "but I don't know him." »
In the midst of this dispute, the sound of cannon was heard. The noise increases from moment to moment. Everyone takes their glasses. We see two vessels fighting at a distance of about three miles; the wind brought them both so close to the French ship that we had the pleasure of seeing the fight at our ease. At last one of the two vessels let the other a broadside so low and so just that it sank her to the bottom. Candide and Martin distinctly perceived a hundred men on the deck of the sinking vessel; they all raised their hands to heaven and uttered terrible cries; in a moment everything was swallowed up.
" Well! said Martin, that's how men treat each other. "It is true," said Candide, "that there is something diabolical in this affair. So saying, he saw something of a brilliant red swimming by his ship. They untied the boat to see what it could be: it was one of his sheep. Candide was more delighted to find this sheep than he had been distressed to lose a hundred of them, all laden with large diamonds from Eldorado. The French captain soon perceived that the captain of the sinking vessel was Spanish, and that of the sunken vessel was a Dutch pirate; it was he who had robbed Candide. The immense riches which this villain had seized were buried with him in the sea, and only one sheep was saved. "You see," said Candide to Martin, "that crime is sometimes punished: that rascal of a Dutch boss got the fate he deserved. "Yes," said Martin, "but did the passengers who were on his ship have to perish too?" God punished this rascal, the devil drowned the others. »
However, the French vessel and the Spanish continued their journey, and Candide continued his conversations with Martin. They disputed fifteen days in succession, and at the end of fifteen days they were as advanced as the first. But in the end they talked, they communicated ideas, they consoled each other. Candide stroked his sheep. "Since I have found you," he said, "I could very well find Cunegonde." »
Chapter 21
Candide and Martin approach the coasts of France and reason.
We finally saw the coasts of France. "Have you ever been to France, Monsieur Martin?" said Candide. — Yes, said Martin, I have traveled through several provinces. There are some where half the inhabitants are mad, some where one is too cunning, others where one is generally quite gentle and quite stupid, others where one plays the beautiful spirit; and in all of them the principal occupation is love, the second to slander, and the third to speak nonsense. "But, Monsieur Martin, have you seen Paris?" “Yes, I saw Paris; it comes from all those species; it is a chaos, it is a press in which everyone seeks pleasure, and where hardly anyone finds it, at least so it seemed to me. I stayed there a short time; I was robbed there, on arriving, of everything I had, by thieves, at the Saint-Germain fair; I myself was taken for a thief, and I was eight days in prison; after which I became a printer's corrector to earn enough to return on foot to Holland. I knew the writing rabble, the cabaling rabble, and the convulsive rabble. They say there are very polite people in that town; I want to believe it.
"As for me, I have no curiosity to see France," said Candide; you can easily guess that, when one has spent a month in Eldorado, one no longer cares to see anything on earth but Miss Cunégonde; I will wait for him in Venice; we will cross France to go to Italy; won't you accompany me? " Very willingly," said Martin; it is said that Venice is only good for noble Venetians, but that however foreigners are very well received there when they have a lot of money; I have none, you have none, I will follow you everywhere. "By the way," said Candide, "do you think that the earth was originally a sea, as is asserted in that big book which belongs to the captain of the vessel?" "I don't believe it at all," said Martin, "nor of all the daydreams we've been told for some time. "But for what end was this world formed?" said Candide. "To infuriate us," Martin replied. "Aren't you very surprised," continued Candide, "at the love that these two girls from the country of Oreillons had for these two monkeys, and whose adventure I have told you?" "Not at all," said Martin; I do not see what is strange about this passion; I have seen so many extraordinary things that there is nothing extraordinary left. "Do you believe," said Candide, "that men have always massacred one another as they do today?" that they have always been liars, deceivers, perfidious, ungrateful, brigands, weak, fickle, cowards, envious, greedy, drunkards, avaricious, ambitious, bloodthirsty, slanderers, debauched, fanatics, hypocrites and fools? "Do you believe," said Martin, "that hawks have always eaten pigeons when they find them?" "Yes, no doubt," said Candide. - Well! said Martin, if hawks have always had the same character, why do you want men to have changed theirs? - Oh! said Candide, there is a lot of difference, because free will...” Reasoning thus, they arrived in Bordeaux.
Chapter 22
What happened in France to Candide and Martin.
Candide stopped in Bordeaux only as long as it took to sell a few pebbles from the Dorado, and to put up with a good two-seater chair; for he could no longer do without his philosopher Martin. He was only very sorry to part with his sheep, which he left to the Bordeaux Academy of Sciences, which proposed for the subject of this year's prize to find why the wool of this sheep was red; and the prize was awarded to a scholar from the North, who proved by A plus B, minus C, divided by Z, that the sheep must be red, and die of sheep pox.
However, all the travelers whom Candide met in the cabarets along the way said to him: "We are going to Paris." This general eagerness finally gave him the desire to see this capital; it was not much to turn aside from the road to Venice.
He entered by the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, and thought he was in the vilest village in Vestphalia.
No sooner was Candide in his inn than he was attacked by a mild illness caused by his fatigue. As he had an enormous diamond on his finger, and as a prodigiously heavy casket had been seen in his carriage, he immediately had with him two doctors whom he had not asked for, some intimate friends who never left him, and two devotees who heated her broths. Martin said: “I remember being ill also in Paris on my first trip; I was very poor: so I had neither friends, nor devotees, nor doctors, and I recovered. »
However, by dint of medicine and bloodletting, Candide's illness became serious. A regular in the neighborhood came gently to ask him for a ticket payable to bearer for the other world; Candide didn't want to do anything about it. The devotees assured her that it was a new fashion; Candide replied that he was not a fashionable man. Martin wanted to throw the regular out of the windows. The clerk swore that Candide would not be buried. Martin swore he would bury the clerk if he continued to bother them. The quarrel heated up; Martin took him by the shoulders and chased him away roughly; which caused a great scandal, of which a report was made.
Candide heals; and during his convalescence he had very good company at supper at home. We were playing high stakes. Candide was astonished that the aces never came to him; and Martin was not surprised.
Among those who did him the honors of the city, there was a little Perigord abbot, one of those eager people, always alert, always helpful, cheeky, caressing, accommodating, who watch for strangers as they pass, please them. scandalous history of the city, and offer them pleasures at all costs. This first led Candide and Martin to comedy. A new tragedy was being played there. Candide found himself placed near some fine minds. This did not prevent him from crying at perfectly acted scenes. One of the reasoners who were at her side said to her during an intermission: “You are very wrong to cry: this actress is very bad; the actor who plays with her is an even worse actor; the play is even worse than the actors; the author does not know a word of Arabic, and yet the scene is in Arabia; and, moreover, he is a man who does not believe in innate ideas: tomorrow I will bring you twenty pamphlets against him. "Monsieur, how many plays do you have in France?" said Candide to the abbé; who replied, "Five or six thousand." "That's a lot," said Candide; how many good ones are there? "Fifteen or sixteen," replied the other. "That's a lot," said Martin.
Candide was very pleased with an actress who played Queen Elizabeth in a rather dull tragedy that is sometimes played. 'This actress,' he said to Martin, 'pleases me very much; she looks like Miss Cunégonde; I would be happy to greet her. The Perigordian abbé offered to introduce her to her room. Candide, brought up in Germany, asked what the etiquette was, and how the queens of England were treated in France. "We must distinguish," said the abbé; in the provinces, they are taken to the cabaret; in Paris, they are respected when they are beautiful, and they are thrown into the garbage when they are dead. — Queens on the road! said Candide. "Yes, really," said Martin; Monsieur l'abbé is right: I was in Paris when Mademoiselle Monime passed, as they say, from this life to the other; he was refused what these people call the honors of burial, that is to say, to rot with all the beggars of the neighborhood in an ugly cemetery; she was buried alone with her band at the corner of the rue de Bourgogne; which must have pained her extremely, for she thought very nobly. "That's very impolite," said Candide. - What do you want? said Martin; these people are like that. Imagine all the contradictions, all the possible incompatibilities, you will see them in the government, in the courts, in the churches, in the shows of this strange nation. "Is it true that people always laugh in Paris?" said Candide. "Yes," said the abbé, "but he is furious; for they complain of everything with great bursts of laughter; and even the most detestable actions are performed there while laughing.
"Who is that fat pig who said so much ill of the play in which I cried so much and of the actors who gave me so much pleasure?" said Candide. "It's a living evil," replied the abbé, who earns his living by speaking ill of all the plays and all the books; he hates whoever succeeds, as the eunuchs hate the enjoyers: he is one of those serpents of literature which feed on mire and venom; it is a follicular. "What do you call follicular?" said Candide. "He is," said the abbé, "a leaf-maker, a Fréron." »
This is how Candide, Martin and the Périgourdin reasoned on the stairs, watching the world pass by as they left the room. “Although I am very anxious to see Mlle Cunegonde again,” said Candide, “I would like to have supper with Mlle Clairon; because it seemed to me admirable. »
The abbé was not a man to approach Mlle Clairon, who saw only good company. "She's engaged for tonight," he said; but I shall have the honor of taking you to a lady of quality, and there you will know Paris as if you had been there four years. »
Candide, who was naturally curious, allowed himself to be led to the lady's house, at the end of the Faubourg Saint-Honoré; they were busy with a pharaoh; twelve sad pundits each held a little book of cards in their hands, a horned register of their misfortunes. A profound silence reigned, pallor was on the brows of the pundits, anxiety on that of the banker, and the lady of the house, seated near this pitiless banker, noticed with lynx eyes all the parolis, all the seven-and-twenties. -the campaign, in which each player cornait his cards; she had them dehorned with severe but polite attention, and did not get angry for fear of losing her practice: the lady called herself the Marquise de Parolignac. His daughter, aged fifteen, was one of the pundits and warned with a wink of the trickery of these poor people, who were trying to repair the cruelties of fate. The Perigord Abbot, Candide and Martin entered; no one stood up, greeted them, or looked at them; all were deeply occupied with their cards. “Madame la Baroness de Thunder-ten-tronckh was more civil,” said Candide.
However, the Abbé approached the ear of the Marquise, who half rose, honored Candide with a gracious smile, and Martin with an air of nobility; she gave a chair and a set of cards to Candide, who lost fifty thousand francs in two cuts; after which they supped very gaily, and everyone was astonished that Candide was not moved by his loss; the lackeys said among themselves, in their lackey language: "It must be some English milord." »
The supper was like most suppers in Paris: first silence, then a noise of indiscernible words, then jokes, most of which are insipid, false news, bad reasoning, a little politics. and much backbiting; there was even talk of new books. "Have you read," said the Périgord abbot, "the novel by Sieur Gauchat, doctor of theology?" "Yes," replied one of the guests, "but I couldn't finish him." We have a host of impertinent writings, but all together do not approach the impertinence of Gauchat, doctor of theology; I am so satiated with this immensity of detestable books which flood us that I began to lay pharaoh. "And the Miscellanies of Archdeacon Trublet, what do you say to them?" said the abbot. - Ah! said Madame de Parolignac, the boring mortal! how curiously he tells you everything the world knows! how ponderously he discusses what is not worth noting lightly! how mindlessly he appropriates the minds of others! how he spoils what he plunders! how it disgusts me! But it will no longer disgust me: it is enough to have read a few pages of the Archdeacon. »
There was at table a learned man with good taste who supported what the Marquise was saying. They then spoke of tragedies; the lady asked why there were tragedies which were sometimes played and which could not be read. The man of taste explained very well how a piece could have some interest and have almost no merit; he proved in a few words that it was not enough to bring up one or two of those situations that one finds in all novels, and which always seduce the spectators, but that one must be new without being bizarre, often sublime, and always natural; know the human heart and make it speak; to be a great poet without any character in the play ever appearing to be a poet; to know his language perfectly, to speak it with purity, with continuous harmony, without the rhyme ever costing the meaning anything. “Anyone,” he added, “who does not observe all these rules may write one or two tragedies which are applauded in the theater, but he will never be counted among the ranks of good writers; there are very few good tragedies; some are idylls in well-written and well-rhymed dialogues; the others, political reasonings that put you to sleep, or amplifications that put you off; the others, fanatic dreams, in barbarous style, interrupted remarks, long apostrophes to the gods, because one does not know how to speak to men, false maxims, bombastic platitudes. »
Candide listened to this remark with attention, and conceived a great idea of the talker; and, as the marquise had taken care to place him beside her, he approached her ear, and took the liberty of asking her who this man was who spoke so well. “He is a scholar,” said the lady, “who does not lay eggs, and whom the abbé sometimes takes me to supper; he is perfectly conversant with tragedies and books, and he has written a hissed tragedy and a book of which no one has ever seen outside his bookseller's shop except a copy which he dedicated to me. "The great man!" said Candide; it's another Pangloss. »
Then, turning to him, he said to him: “Sir, you doubtless think that all is for the best in the physical world and in morals, and that nothing could be otherwise? 'I, sir,' replied the scholar, 'I think nothing of all that: I think that everything is wrong with us; that no one knows either what his rank is, or what his charge is, or what he does, or what he must do, and that except for supper, which is quite gay and where there seems enough unity , all the rest of the time is spent in impertinent quarrels: Jansenists against Molinists, parliamentarians against churchmen, men of letters against men of letters, courtiers against courtiers, financiers against the people, wives against husbands, parents against parents; it is an eternal war. »
Candide replied: “I have seen worse. But a wise man, who has since had the misfortune to be hanged, told me that all this is wonderful; they are shadows in a beautiful picture. "Your hanged man made fun of the world," said Martin; your shadows are horrible stains. "It's the men who do the stains," said Candide, "and they can't get away from it." "So it's not their fault," said Martin. Most of the pundits, who understood nothing of this language, drank; and Martin reasoned with the scholar, and Candide related part of his adventures to the lady of the house.
After supper, the marquise led Candide into her study and made him sit down on a sofa. " Well! she said to him, "So you still love Miss Cunégonde de Thunder-ten-tronckh madly?" "Yes, madam," replied Candide. The marquise replied with a tender smile: “You answer me like a young man from Westphalia; a Frenchman would have said to me: “It is true that I loved Miss Cunégonde; but seeing you, madame, I fear I no longer love her. “Alas! madam, said Candide, I will answer as you wish. — Your passion for her, said the Marquise, began when you picked up her handkerchief; I want you to pick up my garter. "With all my heart," said Candide; and he picked it up. "But I want you to give it to me," said the lady; and Candide handed it to him. “You see,” said the lady, “you are a foreigner. of Westphalia. The beauty, having seen two enormous diamonds in the two hands of her young stranger, praised them in such good faith that from Candide's fingers they passed to the Marquise's fingers.
Candide, on returning home with his Perigordian abbot, felt some remorse at having been unfaithful to Mademoiselle Cunégonde; the abbé entered into his trouble; he had only a small share in the fifty thousand pounds lost at play by Candide, and in the value of the two brilliants, half given, half extorted. His design was to take advantage, as much as he could, of the advantages which the knowledge of Candide could procure for him. He spoke to her a great deal about Cunégonde; and Candide told him that he would ask forgiveness of this beauty for her infidelity when he saw her in Venice.
The Périgourdin redoubled his politeness and attentions, and took a tender interest in everything Candide said, in everything he did, in everything he wanted to do.
"So you have, sir," he said to him, "an appointment in Venice?" "Yes, Monsieur l'abbé," said Candide; I absolutely must go and see Miss Cunégonde. Then, engaged by the pleasure of talking about what he loved, he related, according to his custom, part of his adventures with this illustrious Westphalian.
"I believe," said the abbé, "that Mademoiselle Cunégonde has a lot of wit, and that she writes charming letters?" "I never received any," said Candide; for imagine that, having been driven from the chateau for love of her, I could not write to her; that soon after I learned that she was dead, that afterwards I found her, and that I lost her, and that I sent her two thousand five hundred leagues from here an express whose answer I am awaiting. »
The abbot listened attentively, and seemed a little dreamy. He soon took leave of the two strangers, after having tenderly embraced them. The next day Candide received on his awakening a letter in these terms:
“Monsieur, my very dear lover, I have been ill in this town for eight days; I hear you are there. I would fly into your arms if I could move. I heard about your visit to Bordeaux; I left the faithful Cacambo and the old woman there, who are soon to follow me. The governor of Buenos Ayres took everything, but I still have your heart. Come, your presence will bring me back to life, or make me die of pleasure. »
This charming letter, this unexpected letter, transported Candide with inexpressible joy; and the illness of his dear Cunégonde overwhelmed him with grief. Torn between these two feelings, he takes his where and his diamonds, and is driven with Martin to the hotel where Miss Cunégonde was staying. He enters trembling with emotion, his heart beating, his voice sobbing; he wants to open the curtains of the bed, he wants to bring in light. “Take good care of it,” said the attendant, “the light kills her; and suddenly she closes the curtain. "My dear Cunégonde," said Candide, weeping, "how are you?" if you cannot see me, at least speak to me. "She cannot speak," said the attendant. The lady then pulls from the bed a chubby hand which Candide wets for a long time with his tears, and which he then fills with diamonds, leaving a bag full of gold on the armchair.
In the midst of his transports arrives an exempt followed by the Périgord abbot and a squad. "There then," he said, "those two suspicious strangers?" He has them seized immediately, and orders his brave men to drag them to prison. "That's not how travelers are treated in the Dorado," Candide said. "I'm more Manichean than ever," said Martin. "But, sir, where are you taking us?" said Candide. "In a bottom of a ditch," said the exempt.
Martin, having regained his composure, judged that the lady who claimed to be Cunegonde was a rascal, the Perigord abbé a rascal who had abused Candide's innocence as quickly as possible, and exempted him another rascal whose could easily get rid of.
Rather than exposing himself to legal proceedings, Candide, enlightened by his counsel, and moreover always impatient to see the real Cunégonde again, offers the exemption three small diamonds of about three thousand pistoles each. “Oh! sir, said the man with the ivory stick, had you committed all imaginable crimes, you are the most honest man in the world; three diamonds! each of three thousand pistoles! Sir! I would have myself killed for you, instead of leading you to a dungeon. We arrest all foreigners, but leave it to me; I have a brother in Dieppe in Normandy, I will take you there; and if you have a diamond to give him, he will take care of you as I do.
"And why are all foreigners arrested?" said Candide. The Périgord abbot then took the floor and said: "It is because a beggar from the country of Atrébatie heard some nonsense: that alone made him commit a parricide, not such as that of 1610 in the month of May, but like that of 1594 in the month of December, and like several others committed in other years and in other months by other beggars who had heard nonsense. »
The exempt then explained what it was about. “Ah, the monsters! exclaimed Candide; what! such horrors in a people who dance and sing! Couldn't I get out of this country as quickly as possible where monkeys annoy tigers? I have seen bears in my country; I only saw men in the Dorado. In the name of God, Mr. Exempt, take me to Venice, where I must wait for Miss Cunégonde. "I can only take you to Lower Normandy," said the barigel. Immediately he makes him take off his irons, says he was mistaken, sends his people back and takes Candide and Martin to Dieppe, and leaves them in the hands of his brother. There was a small Dutch vessel in the harbour. The Norman, with the help of three other diamonds, who had become the most helpful of men, embarked Candide and his people on the ship which was going to sail for Portsmouth in England. It was not the way to Venice; but Candide thought he was delivered from hell, and he counted on resuming the road to Venice at the first opportunity.
Chapter 23
Candide and Martin go to the coasts of England; what they see there.
“Ah, Pangloss! Pangloss! Oh Martin! Martin! Ah, my dear Cunégonde! what is this world? said Candide on the Dutch ship. "Something very crazy and very abominable," replied Martin. “You know England; Are we as crazy there as in France? "It's another kind of madness," said Martin. You know that these two nations are at war for a few acres of snow towards Canada, and that they spend for this beautiful war much more than all of Canada is worth. To tell you precisely if there are more people to bind in one country than in another is what my weak lights do not allow me. I only know that in general the people we are going to see are very atrabilaires. »
Talking thus, they landed at Portsmouth; a multitude of people covered the shore, and gazed attentively at a fairly large man who was kneeling, blindfolded, on the deck of one of the vessels of the fleet; four soldiers, posted opposite this man, each fired three bullets into his skull in the most peaceful way possible, and the whole assembly went away extremely satisfied. “So what is all this? said Candide, and what demon exercises his sway everywhere? He asked who was this big man who had just been killed in ceremony. "He's an admiral," they answered. "And why kill this admiral?" 'It's,' he was told, 'because he didn't have enough people killed; he fought a French admiral, and it was found that he was not close enough to him. "But," said Candide, "the French admiral was as far from the English admiral as the latter was from the other!" "That is indisputable," they replied to him; but in this country it is well to kill an admiral from time to time to encourage the others. »
Candide was so stunned and so shocked by what he saw and what he heard that he did not even want to dismount, and made his deal with the Dutch boss (even if he had to). fly like the one from Suriname) to take it to Venice without delay.
The pattern was ready after two days. We skirted France; they passed the view of Lisbon, and Candide shuddered. They entered the strait and the Mediterranean; at last we landed at Venice. “God be praised! said Candide, embracing Martin; it is here that I will see the beautiful Cunégonde again. I count on Cacambo as on myself. All is well, all is well, all is well. »
Chapter 24
From Paquette and Brother Giroflée.
As soon as he was in Venice, he sent for Cacambo in all the cabarets, in all the cafes, at all the prostitutes, and did not find him. He sent every day to discover all the vessels and all the boats: no news from Cacambo. " What! he said to Martin, I had time to go from Surinam to Bordeaux, to go from Bordeaux to Paris, from Paris to Dieppe, from Dieppe to Portsmouth, to rub shoulders with Portugal and Spain, to cross the whole Mediterranean, to spend a few months in Venice, and the beautiful Cunégonde did not come! I met instead of her only a rogue and a Périgord priest! Cunegonde is no doubt dead, I have only to die. Ah! it was better to stay in the paradise of Dorado than to return to this cursed Europe. How right you are, my dear Martin! all is illusion and calamity. »
He fell into a black melancholy, and took no part in the opera alla moda nor in the other carnival amusements; not a lady gave him the slightest temptation. Martin said to him: "You are very simple, in truth, to imagine that a mixed-race valet, who has five or six millions in his pockets, will go and fetch your mistress at the end of the world and bring her to you in Venice. He will take her for himself, if he finds her. If he does not find it, he will take another: I advise you to forget your valet Cacambo and your mistress Cunegonde. Martin was not consoling. Candide's melancholy increased, and Martin kept proving to her that there was little virtue and little happiness on earth, except perhaps in Eldorado, where no one could go.
While arguing over this important matter, and while waiting for Cunégonde, Candide saw a young Theatine in St. Mark's Square, holding a girl under his arm. The Theatine looked fresh, chubby, vigorous; his eyes were bright, his air assured, his countenance high, his gait proud. The girl was very pretty and sang; she gazed lovingly at her theatin, and from time to time pinched her fat cheeks. “You will admit to me at least,” said Candide to Martin, “that these people are happy. I have hitherto found in all the habitable earth, except in Eldorado, only unfortunates; but, for this girl and this Theatine, I bet they are very happy creatures. "I bet not," said Martin. "You only have to ask them to dinner," said Candide, "and you'll see if I'm wrong." »
As soon as he approaches them, he pays them his compliment, and invites them to come to his hostelry to eat macaroni, Lombardy partridges, sturgeon eggs, and to drink wine from Montepulciano, lacrima-christi, chypre and samos. The damsel blushed, the Theatine accepted the part, and the girl followed him, looking at Candide with eyes of surprise and confusion that were darkened with a few tears. No sooner had she entered Candide's room than she said to him: "What! Monsieur Candide no longer recognizes Paquette! At these words, Candide, who had not considered her with attention until then, because he was only occupied with Cunégonde, said to her: “Alas! my poor child, it is then you who put Doctor Pangloss in the beautiful state in which I saw him?
— Alas! sir, it is myself, said Paquette; I see that you are informed of everything. I have heard of the terrible misfortunes that have befallen the whole household of Madame la Baronne and the beautiful Cunegonde. I swear to you that my destiny has hardly been less sad. I was very innocent when you saw me. A Cordelier who was my confessor seduced me easily. The consequences were dreadful; I was obliged to leave the chateau some time after Monsieur le Baron had sent you away with great kicks in the rear. If a famous doctor had not taken pity on me, I was dead. I was for some time, out of gratitude, the mistress of this doctor. His wife, who was jealous to rage, beat me mercilessly every day; it was a fury. This doctor was the ugliest of all men, and I the most unhappy of all creatures to be continually beaten for a man I did not love. You know, sir, how dangerous it is for a cantankerous woman to be a doctor's wife. The latter, outraged by his wife's actions, gave her one day, to cure her of a minor cold, a medicine so effective that she died of it in two hours in horrible convulsions. Madame's parents instituted criminal proceedings against Monsieur; he fled, and I was put in prison. My innocence wouldn't have saved me if I hadn't been a little pretty. The judge releases me on condition that he succeeds the doctor. I was soon supplanted by a rival, driven out without recompense, and obliged to continue this abominable trade which seems so pleasant to you men, and which is for us only an abyss of misery. I went to exercise the profession in Venice. Ah! monsieur, if you could imagine what it is like to be obliged to caress indiscriminately an old merchant, a lawyer, a monk, a gondolier, an abbé; to be exposed to all insults, to all insults; to be often reduced to borrowing a skirt to have it lifted by a disgusting man; to be robbed by one of what one has won with the other; to be held to ransom by the officers of justice, and to have in prospect only a frightful old age, a hospital and a manure, you would conclude that I am one of the most unfortunate creatures in the world. »
Paquette thus opened his heart to the good Candide, in a cabinet, in the presence of Martin, who said to Candide: “You see that I have already won half the wager. »
Brother Giroflée had remained in the dining room and was having a drink while waiting for dinner. “But,” said Candide to Paquette, “you looked so gay, so happy, when I met you; you sang, you caressed the theatine with a natural complaisance; you seemed to me as happy as you claim to be unfortunate. - Ah! Sir, replied Paquette, that is still one of the miseries of the profession. Yesterday I was robbed and beaten by an officer, and today I must appear in good humor to please a monk. »
Candide wanted no more; he admitted that Martin was right. We sat down to table with Paquette and the theatin, the meal was quite amusing, and at the end we talked to each other with some confidence. “My Father,” said Candide to the monk, “you seem to me to enjoy a destiny that everyone must envy; the flower of health shines on your face, your countenance announces happiness; you have a very pretty daughter for your recreation, and you seem very pleased with your state of theatin.
"Faith, sir," said Brother Giroflée, "I wish all the Theatines were at the bottom of the sea. I have been tempted a hundred times to set fire to the convent and go and become a Turk." My parents forced me at the age of fifteen to put on this detestable dress, to leave more fortune to a cursed older brother whom God confounds! Jealousy, discord, rage, live in the convent. It is true that I preached a few bad sermons which earned me a little money, half of which the prior stole from me: the rest is used to support daughters; but, when I return to the monastery in the evening, I am ready to break my head against the walls of the dormitory; and all my colleagues are in the same case. »
Martin turning to Candide with his usual coolness: “Well! he said to her, have I not won the whole wager? Candide gave two thousand piastres to Paquette and a thousand piastres to Brother Giroflée. “I answer you,” he said, “that with that they will be happy. "I don't believe it at all," said Martin; you will perhaps make them even more unhappy with these piastres. "It will be what may be," said Candide; but one thing consoles me, I see that we often find people we never thought we would find again; it may well be that having met my red sheep and Paquette, I also meet Cunégonde. “I hope,” said Martin, “that she will one day make you happy; but that's what I doubt very much. "You are very tough," said Candide. "That's what I lived," said Martin.
"But look at those gondoliers," said Candide; do they not sing incessantly? "You don't see them in their household, with their wives and their brats of children," said Martin. The doge has his sorrows, the gondoliers have theirs. It is true that all in all the fate of a gondolier is preferable to that of a doge; but I believe the difference so mediocre that it is not worth considering.
"They're talking," said Candide, "of Senator Pococurante, who lives in that fine palace on the Brenta, and who receives foreigners fairly well." It is claimed that he is a man who has never had heartache. "I would like to see such a rare species," said Martin. Candide immediately asked Lord Pococurante for permission to come and see him the next day.
Chapter 25
Visit to Lord Pococurante, noble Venetian.
Candide and Martin went by gondola on the Brenta and arrived at the palace of the noble Pococurante. The gardens were well laid out, and adorned with beautiful marble statues; the palace, of a beautiful architecture. The master of the house, a man of sixty, very rich, received the two curious people very politely, but with very little eagerness, which disconcerted Candide and did not displease Martin.
First two pretty and neatly dressed girls served chocolate which they frothed very well. Candide could not refrain from praising them for their beauty, their good grace and their address. "They're pretty good creatures," said Senator Pococurante; I sometimes make them sleep in my bed, for I am very tired of the ladies of the city, of their coquetry, their jealousies, their quarrels, their humors, their pettiness, their pride, their foolishness, and sonnets that must be made or commissioned for them; but, after all, these two girls are beginning to bore me very much. »
Candide, after lunch, walking through a long gallery, was surprised at the beauty of the pictures. He asked whose master the first two were. "They are by Raphael," said the senator; I bought them at a high price out of vanity a few years ago; they say they are the most beautiful in Italy, but I don't like them at all: the color is very dull; the figures are not rounded enough, and do not stand out enough; the draperies bear no resemblance to cloth; in a word, whatever one may say, I do not find there a true imitation of nature. I will only love a painting when I believe I see nature itself: there is none of this kind. I have a lot of paintings but I don't look at them anymore. »
Pococurante, while waiting for dinner, had a concerto performed. Candide found the music delicious. “This noise, says Pococurante, can amuse half an hour; but, if it lasts longer, it tires everyone, although no one dares to admit it. Music today is no more than the art of performing difficult things, and what is only difficult does not please in the long run.
“Perhaps I would like opera better, if we had not found the secret of making it a monster that revolts me. Go and see who wants bad tragedies in music, where the scenes are only made to bring, very inappropriately, two or three ridiculous songs which show off the throat of an actress; Who will, or who can, will be swooned with pleasure on seeing a castrated man humming the role of Caesar and Cato and walking awkwardly on the boards; As for me, I long ago renounced those poverties which today are the glory of Italy, and for which sovereigns pay so dearly. Candide argued a bit, but with discretion. Martin entirely agreed with the senator.
We sat down to table, and after an excellent dinner, we entered the library. Candide, seeing a beautifully bound Homer, praised the illustrious for his good taste. "Here," he said, "is a book which was the delight of the great Pangloss, the best philosopher in Germany. "He doesn't do mine," said Pococurante coldly; I was made to believe formerly that I had pleasure in reading it; but this continual repetition of combats which all look alike, these gods who always act to do nothing decisive, this Helen who is the subject of the war, and who is hardly an actress in the play; this Troy which is besieged and not taken, all that caused me the most mortal boredom. I have sometimes asked scholars if they were as bored as I was reading this. All sincere people have confessed to me that the book fell from their hands, but that one should always have it in one's library, like a monument of antiquity, and like those rusty medals which cannot be traded.
"Your Excellency doesn't think so of Virgil?" said Candide. "I agree," said Pococurante, "that the second, fourth, and sixth books of his Aeneid are excellent; but for his pious Aeneas, and the strong Cloanthe, and the friend Achates, and the little Ascanius, and the imbecile King Latinus, and the bourgeois Amata, and the insipid Lavinia, I do not believe there is anything so cold and so unpleasant. I prefer Tasso and Ariosto's tall tales.
"Dare I ask you, sir," said Candide, "if you don't take great pleasure in reading Horace?" "There are maxims," said Pococurante, "of which a man of the world can profit, and which, being compressed into energetic verses, are engraved more easily in the memory." But I care but little for his journey to Brindes, and his description of a bad dinner, and the crooks' quarrel between I know not what Rupilus, whose words he said were full of pus, and a another whose words were vinegar. I have only read with extreme disgust his crude verses against old women and against witches; and I do not see what merit there can be in telling his friend Mecenas that, if he is placed by him in the rank of lyric poets, he will strike the stars with his sublime brow. Fools admire everything in an esteemed author. I only read for myself; I only love what is for my use. Candide, who had been brought up never to judge anything by himself, was greatly astonished at what he heard; and Martin found Pococurante's way of thinking quite reasonable.
" Oh! here is a Cicero, says Candide; for that great man, I don't think you tire of reading him? "I never read it," replied the Venetian. What does it matter to me whether he pleaded for Rabirius or for Cluentius? I have enough cases that I judge; I would have accommodated myself better to his philosophical works; but, when I saw that he doubted everything, I concluded that I knew as much as he did, and that I did not need anyone to be ignorant.
- Ah! here are eighty volumes of the collections of an academy of sciences, exclaimed Martin; there may be some good there. "There would be," said Pococurante, "if only one of the authors of this rubbish had invented the art of making pins; but there are in all these books only vain systems and not a single useful thing.
"How many plays I see there!" said Candide; in Italian, in Spanish, in French! "Yes," said the senator, "there are three thousand, and not three dozen good ones." For these collections of sermons, which together are not worth a page of Seneca, and all these large volumes of theology, you can well imagine that I never open them, neither I nor anyone else. »
Martin saw shelves loaded with English books. "I believe," he said, "that a republican must take pleasure in most of these works, written so freely. “Yes,” replied Pococurante, “it is fine to write what one thinks; it is the privilege of man. Throughout our Italy, we only write what we do not think; those who live in the country of the Caesars and the Antonines dare not have an idea without the permission of a Jacobin. I would be satisfied with the liberty which inspires English geniuses if passion and partisanship did not corrupt all that this precious liberty has of worth. »
Candide, seeing a Milton, asked him if he did not regard this author as a great man. " Which? said Pococurante, that barbarian who makes a long commentary on the first chapter of Genesis in ten books of hard verse? this gross imitator of the Greeks, who disfigures creation, and who, while Moses represents the Eternal Being producing the world by the word, has the Messiah take a large compass from a cupboard in heaven to trace his work? I would esteem him who spoiled Tasso's hell and devil; which disguises Lucifer sometimes as a toad, sometimes as a pygmy; which makes him repeat the same speeches a hundred times; which makes him argue about theology; who, in earnest imitation of Ariosto's comic invention of firearms, makes the devils fire the cannon into the sky? Neither I nor anyone in Italy could enjoy all these sad extravagances. The Marriage of Sin and Death and the snakes from which sin gives birth make any man of delicate taste vomit, and its long description of a hospital is good only for a gravedigger. This obscure, bizarre and disgusting poem was despised at its birth; I treat him today as he was treated in his homeland by his contemporaries. Besides, I say what I think, and I care very little that others think like me. Candide was distressed by these speeches; he respected Homer, he liked Milton a little. “Alas! he said quietly to Martin, I'm afraid this man has a sovereign contempt for our German poets. "There wouldn't be much harm in that," said Martin. "Oh, what a superior man!" said Candide again between his teeth, what a great genius this Pococurante is! nothing can please him. »
After reviewing all the books in this way, they went down to the garden. Candide praised all the beauties. “I know of nothing in such bad taste,” said the master. “We only have trinkets here; but tomorrow I will plant one of a nobler design. »
When the two onlookers had taken leave of His Excellency: “Now, then,” said Candide to Martin, “you will agree that here is the happiest of all men, for he is above all that he possesses. "Don't you see," said Martin, "that he is disgusted with everything he owns? Plato said long ago that the best stomachs are not those that reject all food. "But," said Candide, "isn't there pleasure in criticizing everything, in sensing faults where other men think they see beauties?" "That is to say," resumed Martin, "there is pleasure in not having pleasure?" - Oh good! said Candide, "I'm the only one happy when I see Mademoiselle Cunégonde again." “It is always good to hope,” said Martin.
However, the days, the weeks went by; Cacambo did not return, and Candide was so lost in his grief that he did not even reflect that Paquette and Brother Giroflée had not only come to thank him.
Chapter 26
About a supper that Candide and Martin made with six strangers, and who they were.
One evening when Candide, followed by Martin, was going to sit down to table with the strangers who lodged in the same hostelry, a man with a face the color of soot approached him from behind, and, taking him by the arm, said to him: Get ready to go with us…don't miss it. He turns around, and sees Cacambo. Only the sight of Cunégonde could astonish and please her more. He was about to go mad with joy. He kisses his dear friend. “Cunegonde is here, no doubt, where is she? Lead me to her, that I die of joy with her. "Cunegonde is not here," said Cacambo, "she is in Constantinople." “Ah, Sky! in Constantinople! but, were it in China, I fly there, let us leave. 'We'll leave after supper,' resumed Cacambo, 'I can't tell you more; I am a slave, my master awaits me; I must serve him at table: don't say a word; eat supper and get ready. »
Candide, torn between joy and pain, charmed to have seen his faithful agent again, surprised to see him a slave, full of the idea of finding his mistress, his heart agitated, his mind upset, sat down to table with Martin , who witnessed all these adventures in cold blood, and with six strangers who had come to spend the carnival in Venice.
Cacambo, who was pouring a drink for one of these six strangers, approached his master's ear, at the end of the meal, and said to him: "Sire, Your Majesty will leave when you wish, the vessel is ready. . Having said these words, he left. The guests, astonished, looked at each other without uttering a single word, when another servant, approaching his master, said to him: "Sire, your Majesty's chair is in Padua, and the boat is ready." The master made a sign, and the servant departed. All the guests looked at each other again, and the common surprise redoubled. A third valet, also approaching a third stranger, said to him: “Sire, believe me, Your Majesty must not stay here any longer: I will prepare everything; and immediately he disappeared.
Candide and Martin were in no doubt then that it was a carnival masquerade. A fourth servant said to the fourth master, "Your Majesty will leave when it pleases," and went out like the others. The fifth valet says the same to the fifth master. But the sixth valet spoke differently to the sixth stranger, who was with Candide; he said to him: 'Faith, Sire, they no longer want to give credit to your Majesty, nor to me either; and we might well be locked up tonight, you and I: I'll take care of my business; farewell. »
All the servants having disappeared, the six strangers, Candide and Martin remained in profound silence. Finally Candide broke it. “Gentlemen,” he said, “here is a singular joke: why are you all kings? For me, I confess that neither I nor Martin are. »
The master of Cacambo then spoke gravely, and said in Italian: “I am not joking, my name is Achmet III. I was Grand Sultan for several years; I dethroned my brother; my nephew dethroned me; they cut off the necks of my viziers; I end my life in the old seraglio; my nephew the great Sultan Mahmoud allows me to travel sometimes for my health, and I came to spend the carnival in Venice. »
A young man who was with Achmet spoke after him, and said: “My name is Ivan; I have been emperor of all the Russias; I was dethroned in the cradle; my father and my mother were locked up; I was brought up in prison; I sometimes have permission to travel, accompanied by those who look after me, and I have come to spend the carnival in Venice. »
The third said, “I am Charles Edward, King of England; my father ceded his rights to the kingdom to me; I fought to support them; they tore out the hearts of eight hundred of my partisans, and beat their cheeks with it. I was put in jail; I am going to Rome to pay a visit to the king my father, dethroned like me and my grandfather, and I have come to spend the carnival in Venice. »
The fourth then spoke and said: “I am king of the Polachs; the fate of the war deprived me of my hereditary States; my father experienced the same setbacks; I resign myself to Providence like Sultan Achmet, Emperor Ivan and King Charles Edward, to whom God grants a long life, and I have come to spend the carnival in Venice. »
The fifth said: “I am also king of the Polachs; I have lost my kingdom twice; but Providence has given me another State, in which I have done more good than all the kings of the Sarmatians together have ever been able to do on the banks of the Vistula; I also resign myself to Providence, and I have come to spend the carnival in Venice. »
It remained for the sixth monarch to speak. “Gentlemen,” he said, “I am not so great a lord as you; but in the end I was king like any other. I am Theodore; I was elected king in Corsica; they called me Your Majesty, and now they hardly ever call me Sir. I've had coins minted, and I don't have a denarius; I've had two secretaries of state, and I barely have a valet; I saw myself on a throne, and I was a long time in London in prison, on straw. I'm afraid I'll be treated the same here, although I came like Your Majesties to spend the carnival in Venice. »
The other five kings listened to this speech with noble compassion. Each of them gave twenty zecchini to King Theodore for clothes and shirts; and Candide presented him with a diamond worth two thousand sequins. “Who is this, said the five kings, this simple individual who is in a position to give a hundred times as much as each of us, and who gives it? »
Just as they were leaving the table, four serene highnesses arrived at the same hotel, who had also lost their States by the fate of the war, and who had come to spend the rest of the carnival in Venice. But Candide did not only take heed of these newcomers. He was only occupied in going to find his dear Cunégonde in Constantinople.
Chapter 27
Candide's Journey to Constantinople.
The faithful Cacambo had already obtained from the Turkish skipper who was going to take Sultan Achmet back to Constantinople that he would receive Candide and Martin on board. Both went there after prostrating themselves before his miserable Highness. Candide, on the way, said to Martin: “Here are, however, six dethroned kings, with whom we supped, and among these six kings there is one to whom I gave alms. Perhaps there are many other more unfortunate princes. As for me, I have only lost a hundred sheep, and I fly into the arms of Cunégonde. My dear Martin, once again Pangloss was right: all is well. "I wish so," said Martin. 'But,' said Candide, 'this is a highly improbable adventure we had in Venice. No one had ever seen or heard of six dethroned kings supping together in a cabaret. "It's no more extraordinary," said Martin, "than most of the things that have happened to us. It is very common for kings to be dethroned; and with regard to the honor we had of supping with them, it is a trifle which does not deserve our attention. What does it matter who you sup with, as long as you eat well? »
No sooner was Candide in the ship than he jumped on the neck of his former valet, his friend Cacambo. " Well! he said to her, what is Cunégonde doing? Is she still a beauty prodigy? Does she still love me? How is she? No doubt you bought him a palace in Constantinople?
“My dear master,” replied Cacambo, “Cunegonde washes the bowls on the edge of the Propontis, at the house of a prince who has very few bowls; she is a slave in the house of a former sovereign named Ragotski, to whom the Grand Turk gives three crowns a day in his asylum; but what is much sadder is that she lost her beauty and became horribly ugly. - Ah! beautiful or ugly, said Candide, I am an honest man, and my duty is always to love him. But how can it be reduced to such an abject state with the five or six million you brought? "Good," said Cacambo, "didn't I have to give two millions to Señor Don Fernando d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Mascarenes, y Lampourdos, y Souza, governor of Buenos Ayres, to get permission to take Mademoiselle Cunégonde back? And didn't a pirate bravely strip us of everything else? Didn't this pirate take us to Cape Matapan, to Milo, to Nicaria, to Samos, to Petra, to the Dardanelles, to Marmora, to Scutari? Cunégonde and the old woman serve with that prince I told you about, and I am a slave of the dethroned sultan. — What terrible calamities linked one to another! said Candide. But, after all, I still have a few diamonds; I will easily deliver Cunégonde. It's a pity that she has become so ugly. »
Then, turning to Martin: “Who do you think, he said, who is more to be pitied, Emperor Achmet, Emperor Ivan, King Charles Edward, or me? "I don't know," said Martin; I would have to be in your hearts to know it. - Ah! said Candide, if Pangloss were here, he would know and tell us. "I don't know," said Martin, "with what scales your Pangloss could have weighed the misfortunes of men and assessed their pains." All I presume is that there are millions of men on earth a hundred times more to be pitied than King Charles Edward, Emperor Ivan, and Sultan Achmet. "It might well be," said Candide.
They arrived in a few days on the channel of the Black Sea. Candide began by ransoming Cacambo at a very high price, and without wasting time he threw himself into a galley with his companions to go to the shore of the Propontis to seek Cunegonde, however ugly she might be.
There were two convicts in the crew who rowed very badly, and to whom the levanti boss applied a few blows of blackjack to their bare shoulders from time to time; Candide, by a natural movement, looked at them more attentively than the other galley slaves and approached them with pity. Some features of their disfigured faces seemed to him to bear a little resemblance to Pangloss and to that unfortunate Jesuit, that baron, that brother of Mademoiselle Cunégonde. This idea moved and saddened him. He considered them even more carefully. “In truth,” he said to Cacambo, “if I had not seen Master Pangloss hanged, and if I had not had the misfortune to kill the baron, I would believe that it is they who are rowing in this galley. »
At the name of the Baron and of Pangloss the two convicts uttered a loud cry, stopped on their bench and dropped their oars. The levanti boss came running towards them, and the blows of blackjack redoubled. "Stop, stop, Lord," exclaimed Candide, "I'll give you as much money as you want. - What! it's Candid! said one of the convicts. - What! it's Candid! said the other. "Is it a dream?" said Candide; am I watching? am I in this mess? Is this Monsieur le Baron whom I killed? Is that Master Pangloss I saw hanging?
"It's ourselves, it's ourselves," they answered. - What! is that that great philosopher? said Martin. - Hey! Monsieur levanti patron, said Candide, how much money do you want for the ransom of Monsieur de Thunder-ten-tronckh, one of the first barons of the Empire, and of Monsieur Pangloss, the most profound metaphysician in Germany? ? "Christian's dog," replied the levanti boss, "since his two Christian convict dogs are barons and metaphysicians, which is doubtless a great dignity in their countries, you will give me fifty thousand zecchini for it." "You will have them, sir, take me back like a flash to Constantinople, and you will be paid on the spot." But no, take me to Miss Cunégonde. The levanti skipper, at Candide's first offer, had already turned the prow towards the town, and he was rowing faster than a bird flies through the air.
Candide kissed the Baron and Pangloss a hundred times. "And how did I not kill you, my dear Baron?" and my dear Pangloss, how are you alive after being hanged? and why are you both at the galleys in Turkey? Is it really true that my dear sister is in this country? said the baron. "Yes," replied Cacambo. "So I see my dear Candide again," exclaimed Pangloss. Candide introduced them to Martin and Cacambo. They were all kissing, they were all talking at once. The galley was flying, they were already in port. A Jew was summoned, to whom Candide sold for fifty thousand sequins a diamond worth one hundred thousand, and who swore to him by Abraham that he could give no more. He immediately paid the baron's and Pangloss's ransom. The latter threw himself at the feet of his deliverer and bathed them in tears; the other thanked him with a nod, and promised to return the money at the first opportunity. “But is it really possible that my sister is in Turkey? he said. "Nothing is so possible," resumed Cacambo, then let her scrub the dishes at a prince of Transylvania. Two Jews were immediately summoned; Candide also sold diamonds; and they all left in another galley to free Cunégonde.
Chapter 28
What happened to Candide, Cunégonde, Pangloss, Martin, etc.
"Excuse me, once again," said Candide to the baron; Pardon me, my Reverend Father, for having given you a great blow of the sword through the body. "Let's say no more about it," said the baron; I was a little too lively, I confess; but, since you want to know by what chance you saw me in the galleys, I will tell you that after having been cured of my wound by the apothecary brother of the college, I was attacked and kidnapped by a Spanish party; I was put in prison at Buenos Ayres when my sister had just left. I asked to return to Rome to the Father General. I was appointed to serve as chaplain in Constantinople to the French ambassador. It had been less than a week since I had taken up my duties when I found a very well-built young icoglan that evening. It was very hot: the young man wanted to bathe; I took this opportunity to bathe too. I did not know that it was a capital crime for a Christian to be found naked with a young Muslim. A cadi had me give a hundred blows with a stick under the soles of my feet and condemned me to the galleys. I don't think a more horrible injustice has been done. But I would like to know why my sister is in the kitchen of a sovereign of Transylvania who has taken refuge with the Turks.
"But you, my dear Pangloss," said Candide, "how can I see you again?" “It is true,” said Pangloss, “that you saw me hanged; naturally I must have been burned; but you remember that it poured when they were going to cook me: the storm was so violent that they despaired of lighting the fire; I was hanged, because no one could do better: a surgeon bought my body, took me home, and dissected me. He first made a crucial incision from the navel to the collarbone. You couldn't have been worse off than I had been. The executor of the high works of the holy Inquisition, who was a sub-deacon, indeed burned people wonderfully, but he was not accustomed to hanging: the rope was wet and slipped badly, it was knotted; finally I was still breathing: the crucial incision made me utter such a loud cry that my surgeon fell backwards, and, believing that he was dissecting the devil, he fled dying of fear, and fell again on the stairs. fleeing. His wife came running at the noise from a neighboring office; she saw me on the table stretched out with my crucial incision: she was even more afraid than her husband, fled and fell on top of him. When they had come to themselves a little, I heard the surgeon say to the surgeon: "My dear, what do you think of dissecting a heretic too? Don't you know that the devil is still in those people's bodies? I will quickly seek a priest to exorcise him. I shuddered at this, and gathered up what little strength I had left to cry out, "Have pity on me!" At last the Portuguese barber grew bolder; he sewed up my skin; even his wife took care of me; I was on my feet after a fortnight. The barber found me a position, and made me the lackey of a Knight of Malta who was going to Venice; but my master not having enough to pay me, I put myself in the service of a Venetian merchant, and I followed him to Constantinople.
“One day I took a fancy to enter a mosque; there was only an old imam and a very pretty young devotee who called her paternosters; her throat was completely uncovered: between her two nipples she had a beautiful bouquet of tulips, roses, anemones, buttercups, hyacinths and bear's ears; she dropped her bouquet; I picked it up and handed it to him with a most respectful eagerness. I took so long to hand it to him that the imam got angry, and seeing that I was a Christian, he cried out for help. I was taken to the cadi, who gave me a hundred strokes on the soles of my feet and sent me to the galleys. I was chained precisely in the same galley and to the same bench as Monsieur le Baron. There were in this galley four young men from Marseilles, five Neapolitan priests, and two monks from Corfu, who told us that such adventures happened every day. Monsieur le Baron claimed that he had suffered a greater injustice than I; I claimed, myself, that it was much more permissible to put a bouquet on the throat of a woman than to be quite naked with an icoglan. We were arguing all the time, and we were getting twenty blackmails a day, when the chain of events in this universe brought you into our galley, and you redeemed us.
- Well! my dear Pangloss, said Candide to him, when you were hanged, dissected, beaten, and rowed in the galleys, did you always think that everything was going for the best in the world? "I am still of my first feeling," replied Pangloss, "because after all I am a philosopher: it does not suit me to retract myself, Leibnitz cannot be wrong, and pre-established harmony being moreover the most beautiful thing in the world, as well as the full and the subtle matter. »
Chapter 29
How Candide found Cunégonde and the old woman.
While Candide, the baron, Pangloss, Martin and Cacambo related their adventures, while they reasoned about the contingent or non-contingent events of this universe, while they disputed about effects and causes, about moral evil and evil physics, on freedom and necessity, on the consolations that one can feel when one is at the galleys in Turkey, they landed on the shore of the Propontis at the house of the Prince of Transylvania. The first objects that presented themselves were Cunégonde and the old woman, who were spreading towels on strings to dry them.
The baron turned pale at this sight. The tender lover Candide, on seeing his beautiful Cunégonde darkened, with scratchy eyes, dry throat, wrinkled cheeks, red and scaly arms, took three steps back, seized with horror, and then advanced with good manners. She embraced Candide and her brother; they embraced the old woman: Candide ransomed them both.
There was a small farm in the neighborhood: the old woman suggested that Candide put up with it, until the whole troupe had a better destiny. Cunégonde did not know that she was ugly, no one had warned her of it: she reminded Candide of her promises with such an absolute tone that the good Candide dared not refuse her. He therefore informed the Baron that he was going to marry his sister. "I will never suffer," said the baron, "such baseness on his part and such insolence on yours, this infamy will never be reproached to me: my sister's children could not enter the chapters of Germany. No, my sister will only ever marry a baron of the Empire. Cunegonde threw herself at his feet and bathed them in tears; he was inflexible. "Mad Master," said Candide to him, "I rescued you from the galleys, I paid your ransom, I paid your sister's; she was washing bowls here, she is ugly, I have the kindness to make her my wife, and you still claim to oppose it! I would kill you if I believed my anger. "You can still kill me," said the baron, "but you won't marry my sister while I'm alive." »
Chapter 30
Conclusion.
Candide, in the bottom of his heart, had no desire to marry Cunégonde. But the baron's extreme impertinence determined him to conclude the marriage, and Cunegonde pressed him so earnestly that he could not back down. He consulted Pangloss, Martin, and the faithful Cacambo. Pangloss wrote a fine memoir by which he proved that the Baron had no right over his sister, and that she could, according to all the laws of the Empire, marry Candide with her left hand. Martin concluded to throw the baron into the sea. Cacambo decided that he had to be returned to the levanti boss and handed over to the galleys; after which he would be sent to Rome to the Father General by the first ship. The advice was found very good; the old woman approved of it; nothing is said to his sister; the thing was carried out for some money, and they had the pleasure of catching a Jesuit and punishing the pride of a German baron.
It was quite natural to imagine that after so many disasters, Candide, married to his mistress and living with the philosopher Pangloss, the philosopher Martin, the prudent Cacambo and the old woman, having moreover brought back so many diamonds from the homeland of ancient Incas, would lead the most pleasant life in the world; but he was so cheated by the Jews that he had nothing left but his little farm; his wife, growing uglier every day, became cantankerous and insufferable; the old woman was crippled and was in even worse humor than Cunégonde. Cacambo, who worked in the garden, and who went to sell vegetables in Constantinople, was worn out with work and cursed his destiny. Pangloss was in despair not to shine in some university in Germany. For Martin, he was firmly convinced that we are equally bad everywhere; he took things patiently. Candide, Martin, and Pangloss sometimes argued over metaphysics and morality. Boats were often seen passing under the windows of the farm laden with effendis, bachas, and cadis, which were sent into exile at Lemnos, at Mitylene, at Erzeroum. We saw other cadis, other bachas, other effendis coming, who took the place of the expelled and who were expelled in turn. We saw properly stuffed heads that were going to be presented to the Sublime Porte. These spectacles made the dissertations redouble; and when we weren't arguing, the boredom was so excessive that the old woman once dared to say to them: "I would like to know which is the worst, or being raped a hundred times by Negro pirates, having a buttock cut off, to go through the chopsticks among the Bulgarians, to be whipped and hung in an auto-da-fé, to be dissected, to row in the galley, to finally experience all the miseries through which we have all passed, or else to sit here doing nothing? "That's a great question," said Candide.
This speech gave rise to new reflections, and Martin especially concluded that man was born to live in the convulsions of anxiety, or in the lethargy of boredom. Candide did not agree, but he assured nothing. Pangloss confessed that he had always suffered horribly; but having maintained once that everything was going perfectly, he still supported him, and believed nothing of it.
One thing succeeded in confirming Martin in his detestable principles, in making Candide hesitate more than ever, and in embarrassing Pangloss. One day they saw Paquette and Brother Giroflée approaching their farm, who were in the most extreme poverty; they had quickly eaten up their three thousand piastres, had separated, had made up, had fallen out, had been imprisoned, had fled, and finally Brother Giroflée had become a Turk. Paquette continued his trade everywhere, and no longer earned anything. “I had foreseen it,” said Martin to Candide, “that your presents would soon be dissipated and would only make them more miserable. You have overflowed with millions of piastres, you and Cacambo, and you are no happier than Brother Giroflée and Paquette. — Ah, ah! said Pangloss to Paquette, "heaven brings you back here among us, my poor child!" Do you know that you have cost me the tip of my nose, an eye and an ear? How you are made! And what is this world! This new adventure engaged them to philosophize more than ever.
There was in the vicinity a very famous dervish, who passed for the best philosopher in Turkey; they went to consult him; Pangloss spoke, and said to him: “Master, we come to ask you to tell us why such a strange animal as man has been formed.
"What are you getting involved in?" said the dervish, is that your business? "But, my Reverend Father," said Candide, "there is horribly evil on earth." "What does it matter," said the dervish, "whether there is good or evil?" When his Highness sends a ship to Egypt, does he care if the mice in the ship are comfortable or not? "So what should I do?" said Pangloss. "Shut up," said the dervish. “I flattered myself,” said Pangloss, “to reason a little with you about effects and causes, the best of possible worlds, the origin of evil, the nature of the soul and pre-established harmony. The dervish, at these words, shut the door in their face.
During this conversation the news had spread that two viziers of the bench and the mufti had just been strangled at Constantinople, and that several of their friends had been impaled. This catastrophe made a great noise everywhere for a few hours. Pangloss, Candide and Martin, on returning to the little farmhouse, met a good old man who was taking the cool air at his door under a cradle of orange trees. Pangloss, who was as curious as he was reasoning, asked him the name of the mufti who had just been strangled. “I don't know,” replied the good man, “and I never knew the name of any mufti or any vizier. I am absolutely unaware of the adventure you are telling me about; I presume that in general those who meddle in public affairs sometimes perish miserably, and that they deserve it; but I never inquire about what is being done in Constantinople; I content myself with sending the fruits of the garden that I cultivate there to sell. Having said these words, he let the strangers into his house: his two daughters and two sons presented them with several kinds of sorbets which they made themselves, kaïmac sprinkled with candied citron peel, oranges, lemons, lemons, pineapples, pistachios, Mocha coffee which was not mixed with the bad coffee of Batavia and the islands. After which the two daughters of this good Mussulman perfumed the beards of Candide, Pangloss and Martin.
"You must have," said Candide to the Turk, "a vast and magnificent land?" "I have only twenty acres," replied the Turk; I cultivate them with my children; work removes from us three great evils: boredom, vice, and want. »
Candide, on returning to his farmhouse, made profound reflections on the Turk's speech. He said to Pangloss and Martin: “This good old man seems to me to have made a fate far preferable to that of the six kings with whom we had the honor of supping. — The grandeurs, says Pangloss, are very dangerous, according to the report of all the philosophers: for finally Eglon, king of the Moabites, was assassinated by Aod; Absalom was hung by the hair and pierced with three darts; King Nadab, son of Jeroboam, was killed by Baaza; King Elah, by Zambri; Ochosias, by Jehu; Athalia, by Joïada; the kings Joachim, Jechonias, Sedecias, were slaves. You know how Croesus, Astyages, Darius, Dionysius of Syracuse, Pyrrhus, Perseus, Annibal, Jugurtha, Ariovistus, Caesar, Pompey, Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian, Richard II of England, Edward II, Henry VI, Richard III perished , Mary Stuart, Charles I, the three Henrys of France, Emperor Henry IV? You know..." "I also know," said Candide, "that we have to cultivate our garden. "You are right," said Pangloss, "for when man was put in the Garden of Eden, he was put there ut operaretur eum, to Rest. "Let us work without reasoning," said Martin; it is the only way to make life bearable. »
The whole little society entered into this laudable design; each began to exercise his talents. The little land brought in a lot. Cunégonde was indeed very ugly; but she became an excellent pastry chef; Embroidered packet; the old woman took care of the linen. There was not even Brother Giroflée who did not render service; he was a very good carpenter, and even became an honest man; and Pangloss sometimes said to Candide: “All events are linked together in the best of possible worlds; for in the end, if you hadn't been kicked out of a beautiful castle with big kicks in the behind for the love of Miss Cunégonde, if you hadn't been sent to the Inquisition, if you hadn't you hadn't run across America on foot, if you hadn't given the Baron a good sword-thrust, if you hadn't lost all your sheep from the good country of Eldorado, you wouldn't be eating candied citrons here and pistachios. 'That's well said,' replied Candide, 'but we have to cultivate our garden. »
